                                                                                                                                        THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY
                                                           “ I planned to skim/sample John Maeda’s book, then decide to
                                                            endorse it—or not. I quickly found myself mesmerized—and                                                   t h e               l aw s                     o f
                                                            thence the only issue was deciding what were the strongest
                                                            words I could muster in support of The Laws of Simplicity. The
                                                            book is important; and Maeda has made an absurdly complex                                            S I M P L I C I T Y                                                Finally, we are learning that simplicity equals sanity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We’re rebelling against technology that’s too complicat-
                                                            subject—simplicity—approachable and usable. Bravo! I hope the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed, DVD players with too many menus, and software
                                                            people who design the products I’ll acquire in the next ten years                                             DESIGN, TECHNOLOGY, BUSINESS, LIFE                        accompanied by 75-megabyte “read me” manuals. The
                                                            take this book to heart.”                                                                                                                                               iPod’s clean gadgetry has made simplicity hip. But some-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    times we ﬁnd ourselves caught up in the simplicity para-
                                                            —Tom Peters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dox: we want something that’s simple and easy to use,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    but also does all the complex things we might ever want
                                                           “ If brevity is the soul of wit, simplicity is the soul of design. John                                                                                                  it to do. In The Laws of Simplicity, John Maeda oΩers ten
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    laws for balancing simplicity and complexity in business,
                                                            Maeda uses the concept of simplicity to get at the nature of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    technology, and design—guidelines for needing less and
                                                            human thought and perception while drawing out tangible appli-                                                                                                          actually getting more.
Graphic designer, visual artist, and computer scientist     cations for business, technology, and life in general. The Laws of                                                                                                           Maeda—a professor in MIT’s Media Lab and a
John Maeda is the founder of the SIMPLICITY                                                                                                                                                                                         world-renowned graphic designer—explores the ques-
                                                            Simplicity is thoroughly optimistic, entertaining, and erudite, just
Consortium at the MIT Media Lab, where he is E. Rudge                                                                                                                                                                               tion of how we can redeﬁne the notion of “improved” so
and Nancy Allen Professor of Media Arts and Sciences.       as you would expect from Maeda. It is also the most compelling                                                                                                          that it doesn’t always mean something more, something




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #856899 06/06/06
His work has been exhibited in Tokyo, New York,             100 pages of design writing I have read this year.”                                                                                                                     added on.
London, and Paris and is in the permanent collections of                                                                                                                                                                                 Maeda’s ﬁrst law of simplicity is reduce. It’s not
                                                            —Rob Forbes founder, design within reach
the Smithsonian Institution’s Cooper-Hewitt National                                                                                                                                                                                necessarily beneﬁcial to add technology features just
Design Museum, the San Francisco Museum of Modern                                                                                                                                                                                   because we can. And the features that we do have must
Art, and the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.        “ Our lives and our businesses are faster and broader than ever. As                                                                                                      be organized (Law 2) in a sensible hierarchy so users



                                                                                                                                        MAEDA
He is the recipient of many awards, including the                                                                                                                                                                                   aren’t distracted by features and functions they don’t
                                                            such, they are also more complex and di≈cult to manage, for both
Smithsonian’s National Design Award in the United                                                                                                                                                                                   need. But simplicity is not less just for the sake of less.
States of America, the Raymond Loewy Foundation             customers and managers. Therefore, achieving simplicity in both                                                                                                         Skip ahead to Law 9: “failure: Some things can never be
Prize in Germany, and the Mainichi Design Prize in          our products and our organizations will be crucial for securing                                                                                                         made simple.” Maeda’s concise guide to simplicity in the
Japan. Maeda is the author of Design by Numbers (MIT                                                                                                                                                                                digital age shows us how this idea can be a cornerstone
                                                            market share. No one has seen this more clearly than John
Press, 1999).                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of organizations and their products—how it can drive
                                                            Maeda, the Master of Simplicity. The Laws of Simplicity is a clear                                                                                                      both business and technology. We can learn to simplify
Simplicity: Design, Technology, Business, Life series       and incisive guide for making simplicity the paramount feature of                                                                                                       without sacriﬁcing comfort and meaning, and we can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    achieve the balance described in Law 10. This law, which
                                                            our products; it’s also a road map for constructing a more mean-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Maeda calls “the one,” tells us: “Simplicity is about sub-
                                                            ingful world.”
                                                            —Andrea Ragnetti board of management, royal philips electronics                                                  John Maeda                                             tracting the obvious, and adding the meaningful.”




                                                            The MIT Press                           0-262-13472-1   978-0-262-13472-9
                                                                                                                                                                               “Maeda is the Master of Simplicity.”
                                                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology                                                                 —Andrea Ragnetti board of management, royal philips electronics
                                                            Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
                                                            http://mitpress.mit.edu
                     simplicity = sanity

         Technology has made our lives
       more full, yet at the same time we’ve
          become uncomfortably “full.”




I watched the process whereby my daughters gleefully got their
first email accounts. It began as a tiny drop—emails sent among
themselves. It grew to a slow drip as their friends joined the
flow of communication. Today it is a waterfall of messages, e-
cards, and hyperlinks that showers upon them daily.
     I urge them to resist the temptation to check their email
throughout the day. As adults, I tell them, they will have ample
opportunity to swim in the ocean of information. “Stay away!” I
warn, because even as an Olympic-class technologist, I find
myself barely keeping afloat. I know that I’m not alone in this
feeling of constantly drowning—many of us regularly engage
(or don’t) in hundreds of email conversations a day. But I feel
somewhat responsible.
     My early computer art experiments led to the dynamic
graphics common on websites today. You know what I’m talk-
ing about—all that stuΩ flying around on the computer screen
while you’re trying to concentrate—that’s me. I am partially to
blame for the unrelenting stream of “eye candy” littering the
information landscape. I am sorry, and for a long while I have
wished to do something about it.

                                                               i
                   SIMPLICITY = SANITY



     Achieving simplicity in the digital age became a personal
mission, and a focus of my research at MIT. There, I straddle
the fields of design, technology, and business as both educator
and practitioner. Early in my ruminations I had the simple
observation that the letters “M,” “I,” and “T”—the letters by
which my university is known—occur in natural sequence in
the word simplicity. In fact, the same can be said of the word
complexity. Given that the “T” in M-I-T stands for “technolo-
gy”—which is the very source of much of our feeling over-
whelmed today—I felt doubly responsible that someone at MIT
should take a lead in correcting the situation.
     In 2004, I started the MIT SIMPLICITY Consortium at
the Media Lab, comprised of roughly ten corporate partners
that include AARP, Lego, Toshiba, and Time. Our mission is to
define the business value of simplicity in communication,
healthcare, and play. Together we design and create prototype
systems and technologies that point to directions where sim-
plicity-driven products can lead to market success. By the pub-
lication date of this book, a novel networked digital photo
playback product co-developed with Samsung will serve as an
important commercial data point to test the validity of the
Consortium’s stance on simplicity.
     When the blogosphere began to emerge, I responded and
created a blog about my evolving thoughts on simplicity. I set
out to find a set of “laws” of simplicity and targeted sixteen
principles as my goal. Like most blogs, it has been a place where
I have shared unedited thoughts that represent my personal
opinions on a topic about which I am passionate. And although
the theme of the blog began just along the lines of design, tech-

ii
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



nology, and business I discovered that the readership resonated
with the topic that underlies it all: my struggle to understand
the meaning of life as a humanist technologist.
     Through my ongoing journey I’ve discovered how com-
plex a topic simplicity really is, and I don’t pretend to have
solved the puzzle. Having recently spoken to an 85-year old
MIT linguistics professor who has been working on the same
problem his entire life, I am inspired to grapple with this puz-
zle for many more years. My blog led me to the fact that there
aren’t sixteen laws, but rather the ten published in this volume.
Like all man-made “laws” they do not exist in the absolute
sense—to break them is no sin. However you may find them
useful in your own search for simplicity (and sanity) in design,
technology, business, and life.


SIMPLICITY      AND   THE   MARKETPLACE



The marketplace abounds with promises of simplicity. Citibank
has a “simplicity” credit card, Ford has “keep it simple pricing,”
and Lexmark vows to “uncomplicate” the consumer experi-
ence. Widespread calls for simplicity formed a trend that was
inevitable, given the structure of the technology business
around selling the same thing “new and improved” where often
“improved” simply means more. Imagine a world in which soft-
ware companies simplified their programs every year by ship-
ping with 10% fewer features at 10% higher cost due to the
expense of simplification. For the consumer to get less and pay
more seems to contradict sound economic principles. OΩer to
share a cookie with a child and which half will the child want?

                                                               iii
                    SIMPLICITY = SANITY



     Yet in spite of the logic of demand, “simplicity sells” as
espoused by New York Times columnist David Pogue in a pres-
entation at the 2006 annual TED Conference in Monterey. The
undeniable commercial success of the Apple iPod—a device
that does less but costs more than other digital music players—
is a key supporting example of this trend. Another example is
the deceivingly spare interface of the powerful Google search
engine, which is so popular that “googling” has become short-
hand for “searching the Web.” People not only buy, but more
importantly love, designs that can make their lives simpler. For
the foreseeable future, complicated technologies will continue
to invade our homes and workplaces, thus simplicity is bound
to be a growth industry.
     Simplicity is a quality that not only evokes passionate loy-
alty for a product design, but also has become a key strategic
tool for businesses to confront their own intrinsic complexities.
Dutch conglomerate Philips leads in this area with its utter
devotion to realizing “sense and simplicity.” In 2002 I was
invited by Board of Management Member Andrea Ragnetti to
join Philips’ “Simplicity Advisory Board (SAB).” I initially
thought that “sense and simplicity” was merely a branding
eΩort, but when I met in Amsterdam with Ragnetti and his
CEO Gerard Kleisterlee at the first meeting of the SAB I saw the
greater ambition. Philips plan to reorganize not only all of their
product lines, but also their entire set of business practices
around simplicity. When I tell this story to industry leaders the
consistent feedback I get is that Philips is not alone in the quest
to reduce the complexities of doing business. The hunt is on for
simpler, more e≈cient ways to move the economy forward.

iv
          JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY




                                     TEN LAWS


 1 reduce The simplest way to achieve simplicity is through thoughtful reduction.
 2 organize Organization makes a system of many appear fewer.
 3 time Savings in time feel like simplicity.
 4 learn Knowledge makes everything simpler.
 5 diΩerences Simplicity and complexity need each other.
 6 context What lies in the periphery of simplicity is definitely not peripheral.
 7 emotion More emotions are better than less.
 8 trust In simplicity we trust.
 9 failure Some things can never be made simple.
10 the one Simplicity is about subtracting the obvious, and adding the meaningful.


                                   THREE KEYS


 1 away More appears like less by simply moving it far, far away.
 2 open Openness simplifies complexity.
 3 power Use less, gain more.




                                                                                    ix
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



WHOM   IS   THIS   BOOK    FOR?



As an artist, I’d like to say that I wrote this book for myself in
the spirit of climbing a mountain “because it’s there.” But the
reality is that I wrote it in response to the many voices of
encouragement—either by email or in person—from people that
wish to better understand simplicity. I’ve heard from bio-
chemists, production engineers, digital artists, homemakers,
technology entrepreneurs, road construction administrators,
fiction writers, realtors, and o≈ce workers, and the interest just
seems to keep on growing. With support there is always dis-
couragement: some worry about the negative connotations of
simplicity where it can lead to a simplistic and “dumbed-down”
world. You will see in the latter part of this book that I position
complexity and simplicity as having importance relative to each
other as necessary rivals. Thus I realize that although the idea
of ridding the earth of complexity might seem the shortest path
to universal simplicity, it may not be what we truly desire.
     I originally conceived this book as a sort of Simplicity 101,
to give readers an understanding of the foundation of simplici-
ty as it relates to design, technology, business, and life. But now
I see that a foundation can wait until I’m 85 like my professor
friend, and for now a framework will su≈ce which you now
hold in your hands. Also, in the course of completing my MBA,
I found that the majority of books on innovation and business
are published by a single authority. I have been mellowed by
many sobering events in my otherwise extremely fortunate life,
so I was looking for something that was more heartful than a
book specifically aimed at the technology or business market.

                                                                 v
                   SIMPLICITY = SANITY



     My good friends at the MIT Press were supportive of a
softer and more creative approach to the developing arena of
simplicity and here you have the first step in such a series. The
price-point and design of these books were carefully targeted
for the distinguishing reader that is looking for something new
and diΩerent. At the heart of the series is a focus on the busi-
ness of technology, grounded in an expert’s knowledge of
design, and with a light touch of curiosity about life. I welcome
you to this creative experience.


HOW-TO    USE   THIS    BOOK



The ten Laws outlined in the body of this book are generally
independent of each other and can be used together or alone.
There are three flavors of simplicity discussed here, where the
successive set of three Laws (1 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7 to 9) corre-
spond to increasingly complicated conditions of simplicity:
basic, intermediate, and deep. Of the three clusters, basic sim-
plicity (1 to 3) is immediately applicable to thinking about the
design of a product or the layout of your living room. On the
other hand, intermediate simplicity (4 to 6) is more subtle in
meaning, and deep simplicity (7 to 9) ventures into thoughts
that are still ripening on the vine. If you wish to save time (in
accordance with the third Law of time), I suggest you start
with basic simplicity (1 to 3) and then skip to the tenth Law of
the one which sums up the entire set.
     Each section is a collection of micro-essays that cluster
around the main topic presented. Rarely do I have answers, but
instead I have a lot of questions just like you. Every Law begins

vi
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



with an icon of my design that represents the basic concepts I
present. The images are not a literal explanation of the con-
tents, but may help you to better appreciate each of the Laws.
There is also associated Web content at lawsofsimplicity.com
where you can download the artwork as desktop patterns in
case that will help to motivate you.
     In addition to the ten Laws, I oΩer three Keys to achieving
simplicity in the technology domain. Think of them as areas in
which to invest R&D resources, or simply to keep an eye on.
How these Keys, and the Laws, connect to market valuation is
a new hobby of mine. Those experiments and further predic-
tions of simplifying technology trends are visible as a free serv-
ice on lawsofsimplicity.com as well.
     I intentionally capped the total page count at 100 pages in
accordance with the time-saving third Law—which is truly
dear to my heart. Thus the entire book can be read during your
lunch break or else on a short flight. But please don’t feel pres-
sured to rush through this book. When I first set out with
youthful zeal to attack the simplicity question, I felt that com-
plexity was destroying our world and had to be stopped! At a
conference where I later spoke, a 73-year old artist took me
aside and said, “The world’s always been falling apart. So relax.”
He’s probably right. So take his advice and try to lean back
while you read this book, if you can.




                                                               vii
                    SIMPLICITY = SANITY



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



I would like to thank Ellen Faran and Robert Prior of the MIT
Press for shepherding the process of publishing this book at a
speed unlike any other. The appropriateness of simplicity as a
concept coming from MIT made immediate sense to both of
them from the beginning. Given the support I’ve experienced
from the MIT Press, I know that their enthusiasm was infec-
tious in a way that made a normally complex task get executed
more simply. Of course I would not wish it any other way ;-).
       The inspirations for this book are many, and most of them
are evident throughout the discussion of the Laws. I don’t take
inspiration lightly—it sits squarely in the middle of my brain, as
presented in the fourth Law of learn. I continue to look to
inspiration from my brilliant graduate students, energetic
undergraduates, incredible staΩ, and unparalleled colleagues at
MIT, especially at the Media Lab.
       My texts were tuned and simplified by the masterful liter-
ary mind of Jessie Scanlon. I’ve known Jessie since her Wired
Magazine days and always look to her for the latest information
on breaking trends in design. Jessie was my writing Master in
this process, and I appreciate her time and patience.
       A final pass of meticulous edits was executed by my stu-
dents Burak Arikan, Annie Ding, Brent Fitzgerald, Amber Frid-
Jimenez, Kelly Norton, and Danny Shen. Thank you guys!


       Finally, I thank my wife Kris and our daughters for keep-
ing my life both wonderfully complex, yet infinitely simple.


viii
LAW   1
                             Law 1
                            reduce


      The simplest way to achieve simplicity
        is through thoughtful reduction.




The easiest way to simplify a system is to remove functionality.
Today’s DVD, for instance, has too many buttons if all you want
to do is play a movie. A solution could be to remove the buttons
for Rewind, Forward, Eject, and so forth until only one button
remains: Play.
     But what if you want to replay a favorite scene? Or pause
the movie while you take that all-important bathroom break?
The fundamental question is, where’s the balance between sim-
plicity and complexity?

      how simple can                   how complex does
       you make it?                       it have to be?

On the one hand, you want a product or service to be easy to
use; on the other hand you want it to do everything that a per-
son might want it to do.
     The process of reaching an ideal state of simplicity can be
truly complex, so allow me to simplify it for you. The simplest
way to achieve simplicity is through thoughtful reduction. When
in doubt, just remove. But be careful of what you remove.

                                                               1
                       LAW 1     /   REDUCE



SHE’S    ALWAYS     RIGHT



We would find it hard to remove any given button from a DVD
player if forced to do so. The problem is one of choosing what
deserves to live, at the sacrifice of what deserves to die. Such
decisions are not easy when most of us are not trained to be
despots. Our usual preference is to let live what lives: we would
choose to keep all the functionality if we could.
     When it is possible to reduce a system’s functionality
without significant penalty, true simplification is realized.
When everything that can be removed is gone, a second battery
of methods can be employed. I call these methods she: shrink,
hide, embody.


SHE:    SHRINK



When a small, unassuming object exceeds our expectations, we
are not only surprised but pleased. Our usual reaction is some-
thing like, “That little thing did all that?” Simplicity is about the
unexpected pleasure derived from what is likely to be
insignificant and would otherwise go unnoticed. The smaller
the object, the more forgiving we can be when it misbehaves.
     Making things smaller doesn’t make them necessarily bet-
ter, but when made so we tend to have a more forgiving attitude
towards their existence. A larger-than-human-scale object
demands its rightful respect, whereas a tiny object can be
something that deserves our pity. When comparing a kitchen
spoon to a construction bulldozer the larger scale of the vehicle
instills fear, while the rounded utensil appears harmless and

2
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



inconsequential. The bulldozer can run you over and end your
life, but if the spoon were to fall on top of you, your life would
likely be spared. Guns, mace cannisters, and little karate
experts of course are the exception to this rule of “fear the
large, endear the small.”
     Technology is shrink-ing. The computational power of a
machine that sixty years ago weighed 60,000 pounds and occu-
pied 1,800 square feet can now be packed onto a sliver of metal
less than a tenth the size of the nail on your pinkie. Integrated
circuit (IC) chip technology—commonly referred to as “com-
puter chips”—allows far greater complexity at a much tinier
scale. IC chips lie at the heart of the problem of complex
devices today as they enable increasingly smaller devices to be
created. A kitchen spoon and a mobile phone can share the
exact same physical dimensions, yet the many IC’s embedded
inside the phone make the device easily more complex than the
bulldozer—so looks can be deceiving.
     Thus while IC’s are a primary driver of complexity in
modern day objects, they also enable the ability to shrink a
frighteningly complex machine to the size of a cute little gum-
drop. The smaller the object is, the lower the expectations; the
more IC’s that are inside, the greater the power. In this age of
wireless technology that connects the IC inside the phone with
all the computers in the world, power has now become
absolute. There is no turning back to the age when large objects
were complex and small objects were simple.
     Babies are examples of complex machines that although
small, require constant attention to the point of driving most
parents insane. Yet in the midst of the havoc they wreak, a pre-

                                                                3
                       LAW 1    /   REDUCE



cious moment can give way when their big beautiful eyes peer
into your tired bleariness with a look of, “Help me! Love me!” It
is said that this irresistible cuteness is their key self-preserva-
tion mechanism, which I know myself works for a fact, having
experienced it many times over. Fragility is an essential coun-
teracting force to complexity because it can instill pity—which
by coincidence also occurs in the word simplicity!
     The science of making an object appear delicate and frag-
ile is a skill practiced throughout the history of art. An artist is
trained to evoke emotion in his fellow human being through the
work he creates, whether that emotion be pity, fear, anger, or
any other feeling or combination thereof. Of the many tools at
the artist’s disposal to achieve enhanced small-ification are
lightness and thinness.
     For example, the mirrored back of an Apple iPod creates
the illusion that the object is only as thin as the floating white
or black plastic layer because the rest of the object adapts to its
surroundings. Already thin, flat-screen displays like LCD’s or
plasmas are made to appear even lighter by sitting atop minimal
structural supports or in the extreme case floating on an invisi-
ble Lucite platform. Another common approach to achieving
thinness is seen in the Lenovo ThinkPad’s beveled clamshell as
your eyes travel down and oΩ the bottom edge of the keyboard
to nothingness. A further collection of these types of designs
can be browsed at lawsofsimplicity.com at your convenience.
     Any design that incorporates lightness and thinness con-
veys the impression of being smaller, lesser, and humbler. Pity
gives way to respect when much more value is delivered than
originally expected. There is a steady stream of core technolo-

4
       JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



gies that will make things smaller, such as nanotechnology—the
science of building machines that fit between your squeezed
thumb and forefinger. Lessening the inevitable complicating
blow of these technologies by way of shrink may seem like a
form of deception, which it is. But anything that can make the
medicine of complexity go down easier is a form of simplicity,
even when it is an act of deceit.


SHE:    HIDE



When all features that can be removed have been, and a prod-
uct has been made slim, light, and thin, it’s time for the second
method: hide the complexity through brute-force methods. A
classical example of this technique is the Swiss army knife.
Only the tool you wish to use is exposed, while the other blades
and drivers are hidden.
     With an endless array of buttons, remote controls for
audio/video equipment are notoriously confusing. In the 90s, a
common design solution was to hide the less-used functions,
such as setting the time or date behind a hidden door, while
keeping only the primary functions such as Play, Stop, and Eject
exposed. This approach is no longer popular, probably due to a
combination of the added production costs and the prevailing
belief that visible features (i.e. buttons) attract buyers.
     As style and fashion have become powerful forces in the
cell phone market, handset makers have been pushed to find
the balance between the elegance of simplicity and need-it-all
complexity. Today, the clamshell design is the most evolved
example of hiding functionality until you really need it. All but-

                                                                5
                      LAW 1    /   REDUCE



tons are sandwiched between the speaker and microphone
such that when it is closed it is a simple bar of soap. Many
recent designs have gone beyond the clamshell, and employ
slide-away or flip-out mechanisms. Such evolutions are driven
by a market that demands innovation and is willing to pay for
clever ways to hide complexity.
     But there might be no better example of the hide method
than today’s computer interfaces. The menu bar at the top
hides the functionality of the application. And the other three
sides of the screen contain other click-to-reveal menus and
palettes that seem to multiply as the computer increases in
power. The computer has an infinite amount of capacity to
hide in order to create the illusion of simplicity. Now that com-
puter screens are shrunken onto cell phones, microwave ovens,
and every manner of consumer electronics, the power to hide
incredible amounts of complexity is everywhere.
     Hiding complexity through ingenious mechanical doors
or tiny display screens is an overt form of deception. If the
deceit feels less like malevolence, more like magic, then hidden
complexities become more of a treat than a nuisance. The ear-
catching “click” when opening a Motorola Razr cell phone or
the cinematic performance of an on-screen visual in Apple’s
Mac OS X creates the satisfaction of owning the power to will
complexity from simplicity. Thus complexity becomes a switch
that the owner can choose to flip into action on their own
terms, and not by their device’s will.
     shrink-ing an object lowers expectations, and the hiding
of complexities allows the owner to manage the expectations
himself. Technology creates the problem of complexity, but also

6
       JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



aΩords new materials and methods for the design of our rela-
tionship with complexities that shall only continue to multiply.
Although instilling “pity” and choosing how to “control” it
sound like draconian approaches to simplicity, they can be seen
in a positive light for the feelings of enjoyment they create.


SHE:    EMBODY



As features go into hiding and products shrink, it becomes ever
more necessary to embed the object with a sense of the value
that is lost after hide and shrink. Consumers will only be
drawn to the smaller, less functional product if they perceive it
to be more valuable than a bigger version of the product with
more features. Thus the perception of quality becomes a criti-
cal factor when making the choice of less over more.
     embody-ing quality is primarily a business decision, more
than one of design or technology. The quality can be actual, as
embodied by better materials and craftsmanship; or the quality
can be perceived, as portrayed in a thoughtful marketing cam-
paign. Exactly where to invest—real or believed quality—to get
maximum return is a question with no single definitive answer.
     Perceived excellence can be programmed into consumers
with the power of marketing. When we see a super-athlete like
Michael Jordan wearing Nikes, we can’t help but imbue the
sneakers with some of his heroic qualities. Even without the
association of a celebrity, a marketing message can be a power-
ful tool to increase belief in quality. For instance, although I’m
usually loyal to Google, I’ve been recently exposed to a bevy of
Microsoft live.com and Ask.com television commercials and

                                                                 7
                      LAW 1    /   REDUCE



now I find myself Google-ing much less. The power of sugges-
tion is powerful.
     Embodying an object with properties of real quality is the
basis of the luxury goods industry and is rooted in their use of
precious materials and exquisite craftsmanship. Relatedly, a
designer of Ferrari cars once told me that a Ferrari has fewer
parts than a common car, but the parts themselves are
significantly better than anything else on this earth. This ele-
gant tale of construction uses the simple philosophy that if
good parts can make a great product, incredible parts can lead
to a legendary one. Sometimes there are instances of overkill,
such as the titanium-clad laptop I own—I’m unlikely to need
titanium’s strength to shield myself from a bullet. But I enjoy
the personal satisfaction that a higher quality material is used
instead of an inferior plastic. The upside of materialism is that
the way something we own feels can change how we feel.
     Sometimes mixing actual and perceived qualities works
well, like in the design of the Bang & Olufsen remote control.
The unit is thin and slender in composition and made with the
finest materials, but is significantly (and intentionally) heav-
ier—as a means to subtly communicate higher quality—than
you would expect from its appearance. Substantive technolo-
gies, like three CCD imaging arrays inside a video camera
instead of the standard single array, are usually invisible. Thus
the perception needs to be made visible somehow, unfortunate-
ly in direct contradiction to hide. An unobtrusive sticker on the
unit like “3 CCD’s” or a message that appears when the unit is
first turned on helps to advertise this extra hidden power. It is
necessary to advertise qualities that cannot be conveyed

8
      JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



implicitly, especially when the message of embodiment simply
tells the truth.


SHE SHE’D



Lessen what you can and conceal everything else without los-
ing the sense of inherent value. embody-ing a greater sense of
quality through enhanced materials and other messaging cues
is an important subtle counterbalance to shrink-ing and hide-
ing the directly understood aspects of a product. Design, tech-
nology, and business work in concert to realize the final
decisions that will lead to how much reduction in a product is
tolerable, and how much quality it will embody in spite of its
reduced state of being. Small is better when she’d.




                                                              9
LAW   2
                             Law 2
                           organize


             Organization makes a system
                of many appear fewer.




The home is usually the first battleground that comes to mind
when facing the daily challenge of managing complexity. StuΩ
just seems to multiply. There are three consistent strategies for
achieving simplicity in the living realm: 1) buy a bigger house,
2) put everything you don’t really need into storage, or 3) organ-
ize your existing assets in a systematic fashion.
     These typical solutions have mixed results. At first, a larg-
er home lowers the clutter to space ratio. But ultimately, the
greater space enables more clutter. The storage route increases
the amount of empty space, but it can be immediately filled in
with more stuΩ that will need to go into storage. The final
option of implementing a system takes the form of things like
closet organizers, that help bring structure to the chaos as long
as the organizing principles can be obeyed. I find it compelling
that all three clutter-reducing industries—the real estate mar-
ket, easy storage services such as Door to Door, and rational
furnishing retailers like the Container Store—are booming.
     Concealing the magnitude of clutter, either through
spreading it out or hiding it, is an unnuanced approach that is

                                                               11
                     LAW   2   /   ORGANIZE



guaranteed to work by the first Law of reduce. There are only
two questions to ask in the de-complicating procedure: “What
to hide?” and “Where to put it?” Without much thought and
enough hands on deck, a messy room becomes free of clutter in
no time, and remains so for at least a few days or a week.
     However, in the long term an eΩective scheme for organi-
zation is necessary to achieve definitive success in taming com-
plexity. In other words, the more challenging question of
“What goes with what?” needs to be added to the list. For
instance in a closet there can be groupings of like items such as
neckties, shirts, slacks, jacket, socks, and shoes. A thousand-
piece wardrobe can be organized into six categories, and be
dealt with at the aggregate level and achieve greater managea-
bility. Organization makes a system of many appear fewer. Of
course this will only hold if the number of groups is significant-
ly less than the number of items to be organized.
     Working with fewer objects, concepts, and functions—and
fewer corresponding buttons to press—makes life simpler
when faced with the alternative of having too many choices.
Nevertheless, making the right decisions to achieve integration
across disparate elements can be a complex process that easily
exceeds the trivial task of organizing one’s closet. Here we look
to describe the simplest ideas to help you get on your way.


SLIP:   WHAT    GOES    WITH       WHAT?



Matching up pairs of socks as they’ve just come out of the wash
is easy when they are all the same make and model.
Unfortunately most eΩects that come our way are not as simple

12
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



as a generic pair of black stockings. Seeing the forest(s) from
the trees is a common goal that is made easier by an ad hoc
process I call slip: sort, label, integrate, prioritize.


sort: Write down on small post-it notes each datum to be slip-
ped. Move them around on a flat surface to find the natural
groupings. For example, let me slip my own mind with the
urgent and undone tasks for today: mit press, maharam, peter,
kevin, amna, annie, burak, saéko, reebok, t&h, dwr, and so forth.
Manually moving them around and placing them next to each
other results in the rough groupings below.




label: Each group deserves a relevant name. If a name cannot
be decided upon, an arbitrary code can be assigned such as a
letter, number, or color. Realizing the proficiency to sort and
label requires practice like any major professional sport.

  now     2nd yr   1st yr    now+      new       near      far




                                                                 13
                     LAW    2   /    ORGANIZE



integrate: Whenever possible, integrate groups that appear
significantly like each other. Some groups will break apart at
this phase. In general, the fewer the groups the better.

     now         research                  new        near




prioritize: Finally collect the highest priority items into a sin-
gle set to ensure that they receive the most attention. The
Pareto Principle is useful as a rule of thumb: assume that in any
given bin of data, generally 80% can be managed at lower prior-
ity and 20% requires the highest level. Everything is important,
but knowing where to start is the critical first step. The Pareto
assumption makes it simple to focus on the “vital few.”
     focus                          base                   next




As presented above, slip is a free-form process for finding
answers to the question of “What goes with what?” The many
little bits of cut-up post-it notes on my desk are the system of
chaos brought to order with my fingertips. Finding the organi-
zational scheme that works best for you is a wise investment.

14
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     There is no science to slip, so there isn’t any right or
wrong to the method. You should adapt it as you see fit. If you
slip (sic) there is nobody to watch you fall, so it’s worth a try. A
computer tool for playing with the slip process is available for
free on lawsofsimplicity.com in case you don’t like little piles of
paper sitting on your desk.


TAB(LES)



Getting organized is the theme of this Law, and slip is one of
many ways to get you started. Googling “organization methods”
will give you several million more varieties, like the popular
“mind map” technique where related elements spider out radi-
ally like spokes on a wheel. In addition, a thorough search of
the Web will reveal three-, and four-dimensional algorithms for
organizing thoughts with accompanied visual acrobatics that
astound. Animated text grows from trees, images pop out of a
fishbone structuring pattern, and ideas float and fly in realistic
3D landscapes.
     The visual presentation of information is a topic that I’m
supposed to know a few things about as it represents a corner-
stone of my career. Yet no matter how much I learn about the
intricacies of graphic design, I always end up at the same place:
the “tab” key. In the days of the typewriter, it was the tab key
that could lend the magic possibility of creating order from
chaos. The tradition of the tab key still lives on in the age of the
word processor, but the satisfying “thunk” sound of the type-
writer’s advancing to a tab is unfortunately lost. Most under-
graduate students return the quizzical look of “typewriter?”

                                                                 15
                      LAW   2   /   ORGANIZE



       The relevance of the tab key to the concept of organiza-
tion is that it is the one key on the keyboard that is designed to
make information simpler. Consider the following list of items:


               red lion cola pepper sapphire
               blue bear frappe salt diamond
               green alligator martini msg topaz
               pink flamingo espresso garlic ruby
               white giraΩe milk cumin emerald
               black penguin beer saΩron amethyst
               gray dog water cinnamon turquoise


As posed, their system of conceptual organization is not clear.
Complexity is remedied with a generous sprinkling of tabs, and
then the categories come to life—order emerges.


     red       lion         cola        pepper      sapphire
     blue      bear         frappe      salt        diamond
     green     alligator    martini     msg         topaz
     pink      flamingo     espresso    garlic      ruby
     white     giraΩe       milk        cumin       emerald
     black     penguin      beer        saΩron      amethyst
     gray      dog          water       cinnamon turquoise


       The tabular form of viewing data is by no means rocket
science, but it is a rare sort of visual magic that always works.
In the medium of text, tabs break up the linear space of a docu-
ment such that the paragraphs can stand out as the organizing
principle. Beyond the English language paradigm, computer

16
      JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



programming codes are written in a special dialect that often
suΩers from legibility. It is the well-tabbed program codes that
are known to be the sign of an enlightened mind. When used
strategically, tabbing, and similarly the use of the space and
return keys, gifts the chaos of clutter with the lightest touch of
visual design.
      “What program do you use?” is a question I often get
about the slides I use to present my work. I have concluded that
the proper answer to the question is to counter-suggest the ask-
ing of a diΩerent question, “What principle do you use?” The
plain, unadorned horizontal and vertical gridding of informa-
tion lacks sex appeal, but it is the one sure thing in the vocabu-
lary of graphic design. Whenever I get confused, I turn my eye
to the furthest left-hand side of the keyboard. The quick path to
simplicity is only a pinkie away.


THE   GESTALT      OF   THE   IPOD



In both perceiving and visually representing the natural organ-
ization of objects, we are supported by the mind’s powerful
ability to detect and form patterns. With matters of the visual
mind, the school of Gestalt psychology is particularly relevant.
Gestalt psychologists believe that there are a variety of mecha-
nisms inside the brain that lend to pattern-forming. For
instance, when you see a box made with a single connected
penstroke that is not completely closed, your mind can essen-
tially “fill in the blank” and imagine it closed. Another example
of Gestaltism is the tendency to mentally continue a series of
drawn figures like “circle, circle, circle” with another circle.

                                                                   17
                     LAW   2   /   ORGANIZE



     Allow me to draw an illustration that helps to complete
the gestalt of Gestalt psychology.




What’s the diΩerence between the cluster of 30 dots displayed
on the left, and those on the right? The answer is simple. On the
left there is no order to the randomly placed dots; on the right
there is a clear grouping of some of the dots. We immediately
pick out the group of dots as a “whole,” even though it’s com-
posed of many little dots. In eΩect by gathering the dots into the
group as on the right, we have simplified the otherwise haphaz-
ard display of 30 dots by giving order to the chaos.
     Humans are organization animals. We can’t help but to
group and categorize what we see. Is he a poser? Is she a doll?
Are they together or traveling separately? Does this top go with
this bottom? The principles of Gestalt to seek the most appro-
priate conceptual “fit” are important not only for survival, but
lie at the very heart of the discipline of design. Germany is
arguably the country that originated the design field through its
legendary Bauhaus school founded in 1919. Thus it is a little
more than coincidence that the German word for design is
gestaltung. Traditionally, German companies like BMW, Audi,
and Braun have stood for design solutions that aspire to fit per-
fectly with the mind. Their common goal has been to relent-
lessly find the most appropriate gestalt that befits a need.
     The changing gestalt of the Apple iPod reveals how small
changes in organization create big diΩerences in a design.

18
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



When it first came out, the controls were laid out as follows:




Then, perhaps as a cost reduction technique, or due to com-
plaints from people with fat fingers, Apple separated the four
buttons surrounding the jog dial into a discrete row of buttons
in the subsequent version of the iPod:




Apple had made the iPod more complex. Displacing the previ-
ously centralized functions to the unattractive row at the top
made the newer iPod look complicated. I recall running out to
buy one of the older iPods when this version with the button
row came out. I was extremely irate because they had changed
something from beautifully simple to unnecessarily complex.
     In the newer versions, they have oscillated towards
extreme simplicity by integrating all of the buttons into a single
seamless control:




                                                                 19
                     LAW   2    /   ORGANIZE



Let’s look at all three designs placed side by side:




From left to right we can read this sequence of iPod evolution-
ary steps as “starting simple, then getting complex, and ending
up as simple as possible.” Translating the iPod controls into my
dot diagrams looks something like this:




On the left the buttons are wrapped around the scroll dial, in
the middle they are separated, and on the right they are inte-
grated into a cloud where scroll dial and buttons are one. The
right diagram of the cloud of dots represents where all of the
individual elements have melted into one as if they were opti-
cally blurred through a lens.
     The aesthetics of the blur are common in the history of
art, ranging from the Impressionist paintings by Monet and his
hazy clouds of tiny brushstrokes, to the stylized images of
flowers by artist Georgia O’Keeffe. Soft-edged representations
have an allure of mystique, and are thus inviting in nature.
Similarly, the third phase of the iPod control is desirable
because it blurs all controls into one image of simplicity.

20
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     There are downsides to the blurred approach, as evi-
denced by my dear brother-in-law’s recently observed inability
to operate an iPod for the first time at a Christmas party. It was
not clear to him how to scroll through songs due to the integra-
tion of the buttons with the scroll dial. The question with
which we began this journey, “What goes with what?” is
answered by the blurred approach with simply, “Everything.” I
then remembered that everyone isn’t necessarily a lover of
abstract art and subjective interpretation. Everyone has their
own gestalt, and that is why other MP3 players still sell. But
eventually my brother-in-law did master the iPod to his glee,
proving that the iPod control wheel can be a good gestalt.


SQUINT    TO   OPEN    YOUR      EYES



Groups are good; too many groups are bad because they coun-
teract the goal of grouping in the first place. Blurred groupings
are powerful because they can appear even more simple, but at
the cost of becoming more abstract, less concrete. Hence sim-
plicity can be a creative way of looking at the world that is driv-
en by design. It feeds the mind’s natural hunger to solve puzzles
and to find the right gestalt.
     The best designers in the world all squint when they look
at something. They squint to see the forest from the trees—to
find the right balance. Squint at the world. You will see more, by
seeing less.




                                                                21
LAW   3
                              Law 3
                               time


         Savings in time feel like simplicity.




The average person spends at least an hour a day waiting in
line. Add to this the uncountable seconds, minutes, weeks spent
waiting for something that might have no line at all.
     Some of that waiting is subtle. We wait for water to come
out of the faucet when we turn the knob. We wait for water on
the stove to boil, and start to feel impatient. We wait for the sea-
sons to change. Some of the waiting we do is less subtle, and can
often be tense or annoying: waiting for a Web page to load,
waiting in bumper-to-bumper tra≈c, or waiting for the results
of a dreaded medical test.
     No one likes to suΩer the frustration of waiting. Thus all of
us, consumers and companies alike, often try to find ways to
beat the ticking hand of time. We go out of our way to find the
quickest option or any other means to reduce our frustration.
When any interaction with products or service providers hap-
pens quickly, we attribute this e≈ciency to the perceived sim-
plicity of experience.
     Achieving notable e≈ciencies in speed are exemplified by
overnight delivery services like FedEx and even the ordering

                                                                 23
                        LAW   3    /   TIME



process for a McDonald’s hamburger. When forced to wait, life
seems unnecessarily complex. Savings in time feel like simplici-
ty. And we are thankfully loyal when it happens, which is rare.
     Then there’s the implicit benefit: reducing the time spent
waiting translates into time we can spend on something else. In
the end it’s about choosing how we spend the time we’re given
in life. Shaving ten minutes oΩ of your commute home trans-
lates to ten more minutes with your loved ones. Thus a reduced
wait is an invaluable reward not only with respect to business,
but to life and your well-being.
     Saving time is really about reducing time, and she as
introduced in the first Law can help us. she says that we can
realize the perception of reduction through shrinking and hid-
ing, and can also make up for what is lost by embodying what is
most important in subtle ways. Let’s see if she is right again.


SHE:   SHRINKING      TIME



As a prototypical “busy guy” who’s trying to stay sane, I’m per-
sonally familiar with the goal of shrinking time. I’m the guy
who unties his shoes and removes his laptop from his bag
before he reaches the table at airport security, in the hope of
passing through with the speed of an Olympic downhill skier.
Getting home before the kids are asleep is another daily chal-
lenge—one to which I apply sophisticated routing algorithms
that get me from MIT to my house with the e≈ciency of a New
York City messenger. In the former case I risk embarrassment
while self-exposed in the security line, and in the latter case I
up my premiums by swerving through the infamous battlefield

24
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



of Boston tra≈c. My personal risks when saving time, however,
are small compared to the larger scale at which businesses risk.
     Reducing a five-minute task to one minute is the raison
d’etre of operations management, the field that has brought us a
world that never sleeps and is always on time. Superior opera-
tion management techniques played an important role in the
rise of Toyota over GM in 2006. Promises of radio-frequency ID
(RFID) tag technology that can uniquely identify every single
product stocked on shelves will make taking inventory happen
instantly. Businesses take great risks to optimize their process-
es out of the need for survival. At the individual level, we’re also
in the business of survival but we also have certain freedoms
that allow us to play a diΩerent tune.
     Of the infinite ways to whittle away at time, a superior
solution is to remove all constraints, as I learned upon the
introduction of Apple’s iPod Shu√e. The Shu√e diΩers from
other iPod products in that it has no display besides a single
LED, and thus its user interface is vastly reduced at the gain of
a lower price point and better resistance to wear.
     I first heard about the Shu√e in a radio commercial that
went something like, “Plug it in and get a completely random
mix of your music library. That’s right, completely random!” I
couldn't contain my enthusiasm, and I began wondering: after
Apple invented the usage of white in product design, had it now
invented randomness?
     Giving up the option of choice, and letting a machine
choose for you, is a radical approach to shrinking the time we
might spend otherwise fumbling with the iPod’s scroll-wheel.
The Shu√e’s approach is to generate random choices, but we

                                                                 25
                         LAW   3     /   TIME



can foresee a future in which the iPod knows your preferences,
habits, and even your moods and will play music accordingly.
Eventually Google’s “I’m feeling lucky” search option won’t
have to be lucky at all and will find the exact thing you’re
searching for.
     A version of this future is already with us today. Go to
Amazon.com and it recommends a handful of books you might
like, based on the preferences of people it deems similar to you.
Choosing to browse Amazon.com’s entire inventory would be a
time intensive task, and thus by caring less we can find savings
in time. Letting someone else make the unimportant choices for
us can be a sound coping strategy.
     At a macroscopic level, governments and corporations go
to great lengths to shrink time and cut corners as a means to
reduce cost; at a personal level we make similar sacrifices that
realize similar rewards in the name of e≈ciency. At the end of
the day, there is an end of the day. Thus choosing when to care
less versus when to care more lies at the heart of living an
e≈cient but fulfilling daily life.


SHE:   HIDING     AND    EMBODYING         TIME



Shrinking the time of a process can sometimes only go so far,
and so an alternative means to “saving” time is to hide its pas-
sage by simply removing time displays from the environment. I
stopped wearing a wristwatch many years ago as I found, like
many others, that as a result I never feel that I am running out
of time. Although even without a wristwatch, my cell phone
volunteers the current time. I wish I could turn the display oΩ.

26
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Few examples exceed the slippery trick that casino par-
lors in Las Vegas play on their guests. Walking into a profes-
sional casino for the first time can be a disorienting experience.
Typically there are no clocks or even windows to reveal the
general time of day. This simple environmental setup reinforces
your impression that you might be logically awake enough to
gamble. I would imagine that if it were legal, casinos would
want to reprogram all cell phones in their vicinity to display
time in a garbled fashion in order to keep you there. Of course,
hiding time does not save time; it simply creates the illusion
that time is not of pressing concern.
     When we see the frozen hands of a clock with a dead bat-
tery, and we sit there and watch it, we tend to have a sinking
feeling. Something feels wrong. We like to see time flow, as it is
only natural that it seek its natural progression forward. On the
other hand, when a clock is completely hidden we tend not to
question its flow and instead experience an unsettling sense of
uncertainty as to what time it might be. Seeing a clock’s second-
hand tick-tick forward is a reassuring sign that all is well.
     In the early days of personal computers, the transfer of
data from internal memory to an external storage medium such
as a disk drive or remote computer could take anywhere from a
few seconds to many hours. You would execute the transfer
command and wait until it ended—not knowing how long it
might take. A frozen computer is like a frozen clock, and thus
ways to psychologically deal with this torturous experience of
waiting emerged in the form of “progress bars.” When Apple
used to invest in research, they conducted an experiment in
which a user was presented with a task that required significant

                                                                27
                        LAW   3    /   TIME



processing time. They found that when a graphical display of
progress, or a “progress bar,” was shown, the user would per-
ceive that the computer completed the task in less time than
when no progress bar was shown at all.
     Let’s do an experiment, shall we? Below on the left is a
progress bar that is displayed as consecutive frames in time.
Read them top to bottom, and you see that at the very end, the
bar is fully filled. On the right is a progress bar that shows
progress forward in increments until it reaches its fully filled
state in a step-by-step fashion.




What did you find? I’m convinced. Less time is felt to elapse in
the progress bar on the right. On the left, time messily plops out
like ketchup from a Heinz bottle; on the right, time is gently
spread across a slice of bread like margarine with a butter knife.
     Telling people how much time they have left to wait is a
humane practice that is becoming more popular. Witness the
increasing number of crosswalk signals that have their own
progress bar or numerical countdown display to show the time
that remains. When waiting on hold for a service representa-

28
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



tive, an automated voice tells you how many minutes you may
have until you speak to a human. Time can be embodied in the
face of a clock, in digital form, or in an abstract graphical dis-
play. There are cases when at the minimal level of display a sim-
ple LED blinks monotonously as a kind of visual heartbeat to
signal to its audience that everything is okay. Knowledge is
comfort, and comfort lies at the heart of simplicity.
     Time can be embodied through a more deceptive
approach—using “styling” to create the illusion of motion and
speed. A designer in the 1930s named Raymond Loewy is cred-
ited with a styling concept called “streamlining.” You may not
know his name, but you probably know the Coca-Cola bottle
that he designed many years ago (I refer to the classic single-
serve glass bottle, and not the bulbous one-liter plastic contain-
er used today). Loewy is known for being influenced by the
aesthetics of flight and jet propulsion, and for transferring the
“style” (not function) of flight onto regular household objects.
For instance, a vacuum cleaner or toaster could be made to look
more swift and light by giving it the visual characteristics of an
airplane. A car could be made to look faster by attaching fins
that had no aerodynamic function. Computers today use many
of the swoopy styling cues from the automotive industry to
enhance the image of speed. Alienware, now a Dell subsidiary,
leads this trend to apply “hotrod” styling to a computer in the
form of aggressive air ducts and theatrical lighting.
     Styling is a form of deception that, although misleading,
can be a desirable attribute from a consumer perspective. We
need all the positive reinforcement we can get in order to feel
that we are moving forward. Don’t we?

                                                               29
                         LAW   3   /   TIME



TICK    TICK   TICK



Every year something like this happens: I get stuck on an air-
port runway for 4 hours in the middle of a snowstorm, then
stand in line for 3 more hours to determine my future flight’s
fate, then the next morning stand for 2 hours in a line to get
through security in order to wait another 1 hour on the runway
again. The realization that life is about waiting comes later in
life. As a child, the idea of waiting is something foreign and sim-
ply intolerable. But waiting is what we do in the adult world.
We do it all the time.
       Sometimes the mundane experience of waiting can reach
dramatic heights. Like when you are about to give a presenta-
tion to an audience of hundreds and you are copying a critical
file over from a thumb drive to the presentation computer and
everyone’s waiting for you to start, and the progress bar lazily
marches along ... and ... then ... it stops. And waits. It tests your
faith in the machine and silently taunts you to press “Cancel.”
Hundreds of eyes are on you. Do you have the guts to restart the
process? Can the wait experienced now be gambled against
what might be an even longer wait later? Feeling lucky?
       Making critical processes run faster is a fantastic benefit
to humankind. However fast doesn’t come cheap. The cost of
sending a document via the USPS is 39 cents but to send it
overnight is $14.40—making it close to 40 times more expensive
to get into the fast lane. A direct flight will save time over one
with connections but will cost significantly more. Add in the
interminably rising cost of fuel, and expect to continue paying
an extra premium for the privilege of acceleration.

30
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Web technologies are an exception to this time/cost trade-
off. Google News breaks stories that emerged only “3 minutes
ago,” giving you a free front row seat to world events as they
happen. Saturday Night Live’s boastful “Live from New York”
introduction doesn’t seem like such a big deal when live web-
casts are possible from anywhere in the world. The speed of the
Web sets our expectations to now.
     When speeding-up a process is not an option, giving extra
care to a customer makes the experience of waiting more toler-
able. I appreciate the free cookies and other samples in line at
the Whole Foods store during the Thanksgiving season as the
checkout queue snakes across the entire store. Saving time is
thus the tradeoΩ between the quantitatively fast versus the
qualitatively fast:

   how can you make the               how can you make the
       wait shorter?                  wait more tolerable?

Restated in the terminology of she, shrink the time con-
straints on one hand and hide or embody the dimension of
time on the other hand. Saving time or staying in step with the
flow of time—whichever costs the least to implement—will usu-
ally win the day.
     she helps us to manipulate our relationship with time in
favorable ways. When time is saved—or appears to have been—
the complex feels simpler. A shot from the doctor hurts less
when it happens quickly, and even less when we know that the
shot will save our lives. This latter phenomenon is addressed in
the fourth Law of learn, so let’s not linger but move along so
you do not have to wait.

                                                              31
LAW   4
                              Law 4
                              learn


       Knowledge makes everything simpler.




Operating a screw is deceptively simple. Just mate the grooves
atop the screw’s head to the appropriate tip—slotted or
Phillips—of a screwdriver. What happens next is not as simple,
as you may have noted while observing a child or a woefully
sheltered adult turning the screwdriver in the wrong direction.
     My children remember this rule through a mnemonic
taught by my spouse, “righty tighty, lefty loosy.” Personally I use
the analogy of a clock, and map the clockwise motion of the
hands to the positive penetration curve of the screw. Both
methods are subject to a second layer of knowledge: knowing
right versus left, or knowing what direction the hands of a clock
turn. Thus operating a screw is not as simple as it appears. And
it’s such an apparently simple object!
     So while the screw is a simple design, you need to know
which way to turn it. Knowledge makes everything simpler. This
is true for any object, no matter how di≈cult. The problem
with taking time to learn a task is that you often feel you are
wasting time, a violation of the third Law. We are well aware of
the dive-in-head-first approach—“I don’t need the instructions,

                                                                33
                       LAW   4   /   LEARN



let me just do it.” But in fact this method often takes longer than
following the directions in the manual.
      Something as simple as teaching another person a basic
concept might seem trivial in comparison to managing a com-
plex supply chain or programming a supercomputer. However,
anyone who has tried to teach a child the seemingly trivial task
of tying shoelaces may suspect that writing code for Google’s
page-ranking algorithm is easier. As a professor at MIT, I freely
admit that I’m still figuring out how to teach as I go. The single
most helpful thing for my teaching was to experience the other
side of learning: I became a student in an MBA program.
      Becoming a student has allowed me to relive the humbling
experience of being a freshman at MIT and feeling like the
dumbest one on campus. Being a professor is the easiest thing
in the world—you just have to act like you know all the answers.
Being a student is much harder because you not only have to
wring the answers from the cryptic professor, but you also have
to make sense of them.
      As a student and an educator, I present a few of my design-
informed approaches to what I deem as “good learning.” They
represent a work-in-progress that patiently awaits refinement
through the natural evolution of a living concept.


USE   YOUR    BRAIN



Learning occurs best when there is a desire to attain specific
knowledge. Sometimes that need is edification, which is itself a
noble goal. Although in the majority of cases, having some kind
of palpable reward, whether a letter grade or a candy bar, is

34
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



necessary to motivate most people. Whether there is an intrin-
sic motivation like pride or an extrinsic motivation like a free
cruise to the Caribbean waiting at the very end, the journey one
must take to reap the reward is better when made tolerable.
However, reality TV shows like Fear Factor or Survivor—which
I admit to having watched—prove that sometimes the reward
alone justifies the journey regardless of how uncomfortable a
path it might take.
     The doctrine of “the carrot or the stick” points to a choice
between positive and negative motivation—a reward versus a
punishment. I disagree when teachers give their students
candy and other perks for correct answers, but I also disagree
with a colleague at MIT who throws erasers at students that
fall asleep during class.
     Instead, my ten years of data as a professor show that giv-
ing students a seemingly insurmountable challenge is the best
motivator to learn. It is said that a massive amount of home-
work is a kind of reward for the average over-achieving MIT
student. But after recently experiencing student life myself, I’ve
lost my masochistic attitude in favor of a holistic approach:


                  basics are the beginning.
                  repeat yourself often.
                  avoid creating desperation.
                  inspire with examples.
                  never forget to repeat yourself.


By now you’ve tired of my acronyms like she and slip so I won’t
tell you that the first letters of my mantra above spell brain.

                                                                  35
                        LAW   4   /   LEARN



     The first step in conveying the basics is to assume the
position of the first-time learner. As the expert, playing this role
is not impossible, but it is best ceded to a focus group or any
other gathering of external participants. Observing what fails
to make sense to the non-expert, and then following that trail
successively to the very end of the knowledge chain is the crit-
ical path to success. Gathering these truths is worthwhile but
can be time consuming or else done poorly. Hiring experts in
the study of people, like anthropologists and human factors
designers, is an eΩective method proven by the success of my
friends at the international design consultancy IDEO. Then
again, if you can’t aΩord to retain IDEO and are willing to vio-
late the third Law by taking a bit more time, the easiest way to
learn the basics is to teach the basics yourself.
     A few years ago, I visited the master of Swiss typographic
design, Wolfgang Weingart, in Maine to give a lecture for his
then regular summer course. I marveled at Weingart’s ability to
give the exact same introductory lecture each year. I thought to
myself, “Doesn’t he get bored?” Saying the same thing over and
over had no value in my mind, and I honestly began to think less
of the Master. Yet it was upon maybe the third visit that I real-
ized how although Weingart was saying the exact same thing,
he was saying it simpler each time he said it. Through focusing
on the basics of basics, he was able to reduce everything that he
knew to the concentrated essence of what he wished to convey.
His unique example rekindled my excitement for teaching.
     repeat-ing yourself can be embarrassing, especially if you
are self-conscious—which most everyone is. But there’s no need
to feel ashamed, because repetition works and everyone does it,

36
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



including the US President and other leaders. Simplicity and
repetition are related, as supported by Slate.com’s story on the
re-election of George W. Bush in 2004 headlined: “Simplicity,
simplicity, simplicity.” On the campaign trail Bush delivered the
same simple message on terrorism and Iraq repeatedly.
     Artist Mike Nourse reinforced this point in his 2004 video
artwork entitled, “Terror, Iraq, Weapons.” Nourse started with
Bush’s televised speech on the eve of the invasion of Iraq and
edited out all instances of three heavily repeated words: “ter-
ror,” “weapons of mass destruction,” and “Iraq.” When Nourse
spliced together just those clips, the resulting video amounted
to ten percent of the speech. It’s no surprise that the US subse-
quently went to war with Iraq, based upon a perception by
many Americans that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction
that were to be used in terror operations against the US. At the
time I was certainly convinced and afraid like many others, and
I wasn’t sure why. Now I know. Repetition works.
     avoid-ing desperation is something to target when learn-
ing is concerned. We all want to “wow” people from the begin-
ning with the newest bells and whistles in an amazing new
product, but sometimes “wow” can become “woah” and you
need an aspirin to cope with the anxiety of the overwhelming
aspects of the new. I dread upgrading software on my comput-
er because I know how eager the new program will be to tell me
its latest and most wondrous features. The strategy of “shock
and awe” can discourage the shocked-and-awed as I learned by
experiencing the vast chasm of knowledge between teacher
and learner as an MBA student. I also became aware of how
professors can unknowingly become insensitive in a university

                                                               37
                        LAW   4   /   LEARN



setting. A gentle, inspired start is the best way to draw students,
or even a new customer, into the immersive process of learning.
     inspiration is the ultimate catalyst for learning: internal
motivation trumps external reward. Strong belief in someone,
or else some greater power like God, helps to fuel belief in your-
self and gives you direction. My own inspirational moment in
design happened during my undergraduate years when I acci-
dentally encountered a book by the eponymous designer and
author Paul Rand. Rand’s ubiquitous contributions to the land-
scape of American corporate icons, such as the logos for IBM,
ABC, Westinghouse, and UPS, have provided aspirational goals
for legions of designers. I met Rand at his studio exactly ten
years after happening upon his book and forever treasure those
memories. He died a year later at the age of 82, and the image I
keep of him in my mind is his almost constant, loving embrace
of his wife Marion. Rand taught me so much, in so little time.
     Feeling safe (by avoiding desperation), feeling confident
(by mastering the basics), and feeling instinctive (by condition-
ing through repetition) all satisfy rational needs. Inspiration
from others serves a higher goal that, at least for me, is the true
reward. The practice of education is the highest form of intel-
lectual philanthropy.
     Lastly, never forget to repeat yourself. Might I have
already said that?


RELATE-TRANSLATE-SURPRISE!



My five-step approach to the process of learning continues to
evolve as an educator, but I began my career originally as an

38
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



MIT-trained engineer. During that period of my life, my peers
taught me an important rule for learning complex systems:
RTFM, short for “Read The F*cking Manual.” Someone has a
problem? Tell them, “RTFM.” Case closed—the ultimate in sim-
plicity. Of course, that solution isn’t perfect. There may not be a
manual available to read, for starters, and nobody really likes a
potty mouth.
      An alternative to the roughness of the “engineering
approach” is the more sophisticated “designer approach” to
easing the process of understanding. The best designers marry
function with form to create intuitive experiences that we
understand immediately—no lessons (or cursing) needed. Good
design relies to some extent on the ability to instill a sense of
instant familiarity. “Hey, I’ve seen this before!” is a targeted
reaction that builds the confidence to give it a try. As you recall
from the second Law, the Gestalt principles of design rely on
our mind’s ability to “fill in the blank” by synthesizing plausible
relationships. Design starts by leveraging the human instinct to
relate, followed by translating the relationship into a tangible
object or service, and then ideally adding a little surprise at the
end to make your audience’s eΩorts worthwhile. Or writing
these steps in shorthand: relate-translate-surprise!
     The persistence of the desktop metaphor, introduced in
the 80s, is a ubiquitous example of the impact of relate-
translate-surprise. Prior to the graphical user-interface, the
norm was a single, gridded screen large enough to display 80 by
24 characters of text. The entire world inside the computer was
represented as a linear stream of digital alphanumeric codes.
Researchers at Xerox leveraged the emergent graphics power

                                                                39
                       LAW   4   /   LEARN



of computers together with the common paradigm of an o≈ce
desk to establish a recognizable relationship between a person
and her information. Certain aspects of a physical desktop
translated easily to the on-screen desktop: folders containing
papers mapped to folders containing data files, and the physical
waste basket mapped to a virtual trash can for deleted data.
     The known relationship to a physical desktop forged
immediate cognitive buy-in, which was reinforced by concepts
that translated well. But there would need to be a substantial
reward or otherwise meaningful “aha”-surprise to warrant a
switch to this so-called “disruptive” technology. That surprise
manifested as the ability to collect, categorize, redistribute, and
repurpose many more documents than previously imagined
possible by moving to digital information management.
     Successful cases like the “desktop metaphor” and other
mappings between older customs and newer technologies have
paved the way to make otherwise foreign experiences more
familiar. relate-translate-surprise relies on having a com-
mon experience upon which to map your own, which unfortu-
nately limits the approach to specific cultures and customs. For
example, the original trash icon on the Apple Macintosh’s desk-
top was unrecognizable to Japanese users who had never seen
a vertically-ribbed metallic trash can. Metaphors serve to
relate-translate a key concept, but the surprise can be
undesirable when the metaphor doesn’t work.
     Design culture can also aΩect the way in which relate-
translate-surprise operates. A more rational, typically
German approach to design will diligently relate-translate,
but not necessarily warrant the surprise ending. A Braun

40
      JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



shaver works perfectly, period. Contemporary British design,
on the other hand, can be characterized as being heavy on the
surprise factor as evidenced by Apple’s innovative designs led
by Briton Jonathan Ive. The intensely pleasurable quality of
Italian design drives the inversion of relate-translate-sur-
prise to surprise-translate-relate, such as Studio65’s sofa
inspired by a woman’s lips. Thus there are as many ways of
relate-translate-surprise as there are diΩering tastes.
      Metaphors are useful platforms for transferring a large
body of existing knowledge from one context to another with
minimal, often imperceptible, eΩort on the part of the person
crossing the conceptual bridge. But metaphors are only deeply
engaging if they surprise along some unexpected, positive
dimension. For example the restaurants of chef Alain Ducasse
are always throwing culinary curve balls—just when you think
you know how something will taste, you discover unanticipat-
ed flavors. Great movies, like the films directed by M. Night
Shyamalan, lull you into your comfort zone with identifiable
plot elements such that everything makes perfect sense until
the twist at the end. A metaphor used as a learning shortcut for
a complex design is most eΩective when its execution is both
relevant and delightfully unexpected.


THE   REAL   REWARD



Growing up, I found it odd that my classmates were rewarded
with bicycles and cash incentives for getting good grades.
When presenting this hard data to my parents their response
was, “How lucky your friends are!” End of story.

                                                              41
                       LAW   4   /   LEARN



     Some reward systems stem from recognizing progress
itself as the payoΩ. I witnessed this in my toddler as she grew
from crawling on all fours to walking around like her older sib-
lings. On the way from the kitchen to the dining room there is a
single step down to a lower level. As she crawled from kitchen
to dining room head first, she quickly learned the danger of this
maneuver. Later she invented a way whereby she would turn
her body around to let her legs down first, and successful navi-
gation became possible.
     When she began to walk, she attempted to go down the
step with her not-yet-perfected walking process. She of course
fell. I tried to show her that if she went down on all fours, she
could use her previously devised method for navigating the
obstacle safely. Unexpected to me, she refused to do so and
wanted to walk down the step like everyone else. The reward,
in this case, was growth. When we’re older, we tend to forget
this simple but key motivation we all had as children.
     I find it odd that the cell phone I use is much smaller than
the manuals that came with it. True, that which is di≈cult to
use is proportionally di≈cult to learn. So a complex object war-
rants an equally complex instruction manual. But the manual
that comes with my car is slimmer than the one for my digital
camera. That’s not a fair comparison, of course. To drive a car
in the US, I must undergo formal instruction for a semester, log
many hours of practice, and ultimately pass a licensing test.
Thus taking “Driver’s Education” in high school exempted me
from needing a thicker instruction manual for my car.
     Di≈cult tasks seem easier when they are “need to know”
rather than “nice to know.” A course in history, mathematics, or

42
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



chemistry is nice to know for a teenager, but completing dri-
ver’s education satisfies a fundamental need for autonomy. In
the beginning of life we strive for independence, and at the end
of life it is the same. At the core of the best rewards is this fun-
damental desire for freedom in thinking, living, and being. I’ve
learned that the most successful product designs, whether sim-
ple, complex, rational, illogical, domestic, international,
technophilic, or technophobic, are the ones that connect deeply
to the greater context of learning and life.




                                                                 43
LAW   5
                              Law 5
                          diΩerences


   Simplicity and complexity need each other.




Nobody wants to eat only dessert. Even a child that is allowed
to eat ice cream three meals a day will eventually tire his sweet
tooth. By the same token, nobody wants to have only simplicity.
Without the counterpoint of complexity, we could not recog-
nize simplicity when we see it. Our eyes and senses thrive, and
sometimes recoil, whenever we experience diΩerences.
     Acknowledging contrast helps to identify qualities that we
desire—which are often subject to change. I don’t personally
prefer the color pink, but I do like it as a dash of brightness in a
drab sea of olive green. The pink appears bold and vibrant as
compared with its dark and muted surroundings. We know
how to appreciate something better when we can compare it to
something else.
     Simplicity and complexity need each other. The more com-
plexity there is in the market, the more that something simpler
stands out. And because technology will only continue to grow
in complexity, there is a clear economic benefit to adopting a
strategy of simplicity that will help set your product apart. That
said, establishing a feeling of simplicity in design requires mak-

                                                                 45
                    LAW   5   /   DIFFERENCES



ing complexity consciously available in some explicit form.
This relationship can be manifest in either the same object or
experience, or in contrast with other oΩerings in the same cat-
egory—like the simplicity of the iPod in comparison to its more
complex competitors in the MP3 player market.
     Within the same experience, finding the right balance
between simplicity and complexity is di≈cult. Achieving a sit-
uation where the diΩerences enhance, instead of cancel out,
either’s existence is something of a subtle art that I am still
unclear about. The closest approximation to a solution I have
found is in the concept of rhythm, which is grounded in the
modulation of diΩerence.
            complexity



                     simplicity

     Think of a mathematical graph going upwards to com-
plexity, then sloping downward to simplicity, then upward to
complexity, and back down again ad infinitum. You can think of
this happening over time, like a song that changes throughout
its development; or else you can think of it as happening in
space, like a painting where your eyes travel across the image
and the experience changes. The rhythm of how simplicity and
complexity occur in time and space holds the key.


NO   RHYTHM    AT   ALL



In the age of electronic networking with services like LinkedIn
and Friendster, the practice of sharing business cards is gradu-

46
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



ally losing its value. Nonetheless, having been raised in the
business culture of Japan, where the exchange of cards is a for-
mal act, I am still attached to the custom of presenting my
business card held between thumb and forefingers of both
hands while politely bowing. In my early days there, I recall
being scolded countless times by superiors for not carrying my
cards with me. To present yourself to a stranger without a card
was considered the utmost insult.
     Times have changed in Japan, and the custom of the two-
handed oΩering is giving way to globalism’s more informal
one-handed pass. The printing quality and craftsmanship of
business cards has declined along with their importance. The
phrase “Google me” seems to mark the eventual demise of the
fine tradition of business carding.
     Still the business cards seem to flow towards me in their
regular shape of a rectangle generally measuring 2 inches by 3.5
inches in the US, or in Asia and Europe 55 millimeters by 90
millimeters. My desk is generally kept clear and organized
according to the second Law. Thus when business cards begin
to collect on my desk, action is necessitated. The pile of cards is
sorted according to slip, entered into my database, and then
proceeds directly to the recycling bin (assuming the cards are
made of paper and not metal or plastic as they sometimes are).
     In the interest of full disclosure I must admit that I have
violated the second Law of organize. There is one business
card that has never made it to the waste dump. It is a thin,
creme-colored card with an illustration of a mystical sheep. At
first I attributed my inability to throw it out to the sheep’s
watchful look. Sometimes business cards are printed with pho-

                                                                47
                  LAW   5    /   DIFFERENCES



                   tographs of the person, and I have no prob-
                   lem seeing these shredded so my reluctance
                   to toss this card isn’t caused by the presence
                   of a witness. I do not know the person well—
                   I met Hiroaki only once—so it holds no
                   particular sentimental value. Yet the card
                   has quietly sat on my desk for more than
                   seven years now and is likely to remain.
                            Place your business card next to his
                   card. The monochrome printing of this book
                   does not convey the soft yellow of its paper
                   stock, or the red highlight at the lower left
                   corner in his illustrator’s mark. But your
                   mind can fill in the details. It remains on my
                   desk because I have encountered nothing
                   similar to it in size or pictorial character. It
                   is the one business card that is not like the
others. If thin business cards with pictures of farm animals
became trendy, it would certainly lose its value.


TEA   WITH   TANAKA



I had the privilege of knowing the father of modern Japanese
graphic design—Ikko Tanaka. (His first name in kanji means
simply “one light.”) Once while living in Japan, I attended a pri-
vate tea party at Tanaka’s residence together with the famed
contemporary architect Shigeru Ban. The words “tea party”
conjure up an image of finely woven doilies and petit fours, but
the Japanese tea party is something simply sublime.

48
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Tanaka had been a practicing student of chanoyu (chaw-
noh-yoo), the tea ceremony, and we were his test subjects. It’s
hard to imagine someone so masterful still being a student in
his 70s, but in Asia there are many examples of this continuous
cycle of learning. In the martial art of Karate, for instance, the
symbol of pride for a black belt is to wear it long enough such
that the die fades to white as to symbolize returning to the
beginner state. Tanaka was the black belt of Japanese design.
     The ceremony began, as is customary in some styles of
chanoyu, with an examination of the tea-making implements.
We passed around tea “cups” (more like deep bowls) to admire.
If I remember correctly, I was assigned the cup from the 18th
century that looked something like a horrible accident at the
kiln. It was a deep and shiny black ceramic bowl where all of its
external surfaces seemed to wrap unintuitively in the manner
of a Salvador Dali painting. It was far from clear where I should
place my lips to the bowl.
     There I was at the house of Japan’s foremost master of
Modernism sipping from something completely imperfect, of
non-platonic geometry (no cylinders, spheres, cubes to be
found), that lacked all recognizable features of a cup. Visibly it
was completely imperfect—lacking the smooth and white sur-
faces of simplicity as commonly sold today in the dishware
section of the Ikea shop.
     For this reason, however, the other elements of Tanaka’s
tools of tea came into view as pure perfection. Such as the lac-
quer tea-powder container from the 17th century where its
matte black lid fit with its mate with the impossible precision of
Lego blocks. Or else the subtle details of the wooden surfaces in

                                                               49
                    LAW   5   /   DIFFERENCES



his tea room that belied a lineage of tree that was nonexistent.
The cup came to indirectly symbolize for me the essence of
Japanese aesthetics, which strives for ultimate perfection. Its
unexpected complexity made everything already impossibly
simple, become even simpler.


FEEL    THE    BEAT



Taa taa ti ti taa. This is not some foreign language, but is the
phonetic phrasing of rhythm that I learned from my music
teacher in elementary school. Ti ti ti ti taa taa. Rest. Ti taa ti taa
ti ti ti ti taa. It’s all coming back to me. Hearing the counter-
point between long sound, short sound, and the absence of
sound in the kind of sequence a jazz drummer can create
engages the entire body in dance. On the other hand, if you cre-
ate a simplistic rhythm like “taa taa taa taa taa taa taa taa taa”
where the taa’s go on forever to sound out a monotonic beat,
your audience will not bother to hang around for the last taa.
     Consider in one day, the sequence of events to occur in the
following pattern. Complexity, complexity, complexity, complex-
ity, complexity, complexity, complexity, complexity, complexity,
complexity, complexity, simplicity. Simplicity becomes salvation.
     Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, complexity, simplicity, sim-
plicity, complexity, complexity, simplicity, complexity, complexity,
simplicity, simplicity, complexity. It is the rhythm of simple and
complex that matters the most.
     Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, sim-
plicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity,
simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity, simplicity,

50
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



simplicity, simplicity, simplicity. There is no way to connect with
simplicity when how complexity feels has been forgotten.
     Alternatively, in the spatial domain consider a large can-
vas painted completely black versus another large canvas
completely covered with scattered paint drippings like a bad
Jackson Pollock interpretation. Both are monotonous expres-
sions of simplicity and complexity in their distinctly separate
forms. At the risk of sounding boring, I would place either
painting on my wall at home for at least a day because I like to
keep an open mind. Perhaps a simple dose of imagination
applied to one of the pieces might prolong my attention span.
For instance, a single image where parts are thoughtfully paint-
ed flat black, and other parts that are detailed with splatter
would likely keep my interest for much longer. Variety tends to
keep our attention when the rhythm of diΩerence captivates.
     There are some rhythms that we welcome their monoto-
ny, such as the changing of the seasons from winter, spring,
summer, fall, and back to winter again.
     Crunch, crunch, crunch. I recall walking through the snow
in the middle of night through my quiet neighborhood only to
hear my own breathing and footsteps. I reflected upon the fact
that the snow of winter would eventually cease and give way to
the green of spring. The combination of a silent night and my
eventual advancement to middle age forced the rhetorical
question, “How many more years might I experience a peaceful
winter evening like this?” I am now more careful to feel the pre-
cious rhythm of each year of life. I hear the beat of simplicity
and complexity quite clearly in everything that I experience.
Can you hear it too?

                                                                51
LAW   6
                              Law 6
                             context


      What lies in the periphery of simplicity
           is definitely not peripheral.




There is something about how our eyes and hands work in con-
cert. Picture yourself at the pottery wheel, sculpting each detail
with intense concentration. Everything that matters is happen-
ing in the foreground, at your fingertips, and is completely
within your immediate field of vision. Your cell phone goes oΩ
or the doorbell rings, and this tightest of control loops is dis-
rupted while the background surges into the foreground.
Thankfully you notice that a pot on the stove is boiling over, or
realize that your hand has been cut and unattendedly bleeds.
     While the words “narrowness” and “focus” mean essen-
tially the same thing, the former has a negative connotation
while the latter has a positive one. An athlete who reaches the
Olympics, for instance, is not “narrow” but focused. But focus
isn’t always a good thing.
     I was once advised by my teacher Nicholas Negroponte to
become a light bulb instead of a laser beam, at an age and time
in my career when I was all focus. His point was that you can
either brighten a single point with laser precision, or else use
the same light to illuminate everything around you. Striving for

                                                               53
                      LAW   6   /   CONTEXT



excellence usually entails the sacrifice of everything in the
background for the sake of attending to the all-important fore-
ground. I took Negroponte’s challenge as a greater goal of
finding the meaning of everything around, instead of just what
I directly faced.
     What lies in the periphery of simplicity is definitely not
peripheral. The sixth Law emphasizes the importance of what
might become lost during the design process. That which
appears to be of immediate relevance may not be nearly as
important compared to everything else around. Our goal is to
achieve a kind of enlightened shallowness. It is befitting that
we start this trek by talking about nothing.


NOTHING     IS   SOMETHING



Science holds that entropy in the universe is always increasing.
What does this mean in lay terms? A child opens an illustrated
story book, flips through the pictures, and sees an empty part of
the page. A crayon clenched in her fist, she moves her hand
towards the blank space. What is she likely to do? Fill in the
emptiness, of course.
     This is the eighth book that I’ve designed and written, but
it is the first that I have written more than designed. All designs
have upheld the common priority of maximizing “white
space”—essentially all these blank areas of the page that sur-
round the text. Such surfaces invite chaos, in the same way that
a countertop at home collects change, mail, keys, and so forth.
Similarly we might scribble notes in these empty spaces that
surround, and also in the gutters that separate lines of text.

54
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Consider the simple challenge of a page that says nothing
more than, “Don’t write on this page.” Can you resist the urge?
Turn to page 57 and take the test.
     The inviting, open space of the page challenges your sense
of pride that five written words can hold you in command. Your
natural inclination is to ask, “Why not?” With no explanation
provided, we have to fill in the blank ourselves either literally
with our pencil marks or else metaphysically with our own
conclusions. Maybe it’s due to the author’s religion? Or perhaps
it’s a radical measure to conserve the global supply of ink?
Sometimes we can be oΩ target, but by this sixth Law of con-
text that means that we are actually on mark.
     While visiting a shrine in Japan, I noted a large rectangu-
lar area that was carefully cordoned oΩ by a rope decorated
with white paper markers. The rectangle was empty, and car-
ried an air of nobility because it was on grounds immediately
nearby a temple. Could this be a sacred burial ground? I stood
for many minutes contemplating the meaning of the emptiness,
slipping into the same calm trance I had experienced in the
adjacent Zen-style rock garden. A priest approached the myste-
rious rectangular zone, and waved to a car entering the temple
grounds. The rope was untied and the car slipped into the space
to receive its annual blessing to ward against accident and
injuries. It reminded me that you don’t have to be a Zen monk
to appreciate empty space—especially if you’re trying to park
on a crowded street in Manhattan.
     If given an empty space or any extra room, technologists
would invent something to fill the expanse; similarly, business
people would not want to pass up a potential lost opportunity.

                                                               55
                     LAW   6   /   CONTEXT



     On the other hand, a designer would choose to do their
best to preserve the emptiness because of their perspective that
nothing is an important something. The opportunity lost by
increasing the amount of blank space is gained back with
enhanced attention on what remains. More white space means
that less information is presented. In turn, proportionately
more attention shall be paid to that which is made less avail-
able. When there is less, we appreciate everything much more.


AMBIENCE     IS   EVERYWHERE



Look up from the book for a moment and glance around. What
do you see? I see other tired passengers in the cramped space in
which I type this passage on my little laptop computer. The
sound of the engines is so loud that it is di≈cult to hear any-
thing besides white noise. And the height of the seats prevents
me from seeing more than the baldness of the passenger in
front of me. The experience of riding an airplane can be one of
uncomfortable isolation in almost all of the senses. Where there
is so little of significance to feel, every minor sensation seems
annoyingly amplified.
     For instance, I try to dampen the ambient noise by wear-
ing industrial ear plugs. Yet instead of silence, I hear the slow
release of breath from my lungs. I wear a mask to cut out the
overhead lights, yet the cloth of the mask chafes against my
face, reminding me of its presence and its intended purpose.
Small things in the environment matter more when you are
forced to pay attention to them. Thus the background, or
“ambient” environment, will take precedence over the fore-

56
THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY




  don’t write on this page.




                              57
                     LAW   6   /   CONTEXT



ground, or focused task, when there is nothing to fixate upon
except everything that surrounds.
     When going on a tropical vacation for pure relaxation pur-
poses, embracing the ambience of the destination gives you
necessary repose. The sum total of the many small details of the
experience—the cleaner air, the higher percentage of smiles,
the delicious tastes, and so forth—all add up to what is special.
The hotel industry and other experience-based businesses
require exhaustive attention to many minutiae that normally go
overlooked at the individual level, but cumulatively achieve
real relevance.
     I once met a designer friend in a quiet Paris flat with white
walls, white surfaces, and white furniture. A lunch of aestheti-
cally prepared sushi was served. Red tuna, pink salmon, white
squid, silvery mackerel, and a sliver of green leaf boldly
engaged my visual senses as I took the entire scene into my
mind. I reached to my chopsticks to begin, when my friend said,
“The taste of this meal is aΩected by the room we sit in.” True.
With everything around me in pure white including the plate
upon which the sushi was served, the thin slabs of raw fish atop
the fist-sized mass of white rice appeared to float in space. I
could imagine the taste to be very diΩerent in an environment
that was appointed with diΩerent dishes, table, overall deco-
rum, and even diΩerent people. Ambience is the proverbial
“secret sauce” to any great meal or memorable interaction.
     Creating white space—or, translating that to a room,
“clean space”—enables the foreground to stand out from the
background. However, the reality is that in everyday life we are
unlikely to clear everything out with the ease of hitting the

58
               THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



“delete” key on the word processor. The “taste” of any activity
we face might be mixed in with the distaste of the clutter of our
desk. But coincidentally the uplifting smile of a nearby child
can sometimes help us to tune out any messes at hand. Being
attuned to what surrounds us in the ambient environment can
sometimes help us manage what’s immediately in front of us.
Synthesizing the ambient experience of simplicity requires
attention to everything that seemingly does not matter.


COMFORTABLY       LOST



In 2005 Google launched a service that allowed you to enter
your address and see an overhead satellite map of your local
vicinity. “There I am!” is the immediate impression, followed
by, “There’s everything else!” because you see all the houses
and roads that surround you. Although you usually don’t need a
map to inform your location while sitting at home, there’s a cer-
tain sense of comfort knowing that you can see the spot you
occupy right there on the map. Interest in that web page dimin-
ishes once you have verified your location. The sense of com-
fort gives way to monotony.
     Starting a book is easy, but somewhere in the middle you
can be unsure of how far you are. A simple progress bar, with an
X to mark the spot, can tell you exactly how far you’ve gotten,
and how much more you have to go. Digital books require such
displays, but for printed books like the one you hold in your
hands, a quick squeeze on both left- and right-hand sides can
provide your general locale. Page numbers and other tradition-
al navigational elements like chapter headings are another layer

                                                               59
                      LAW   6   /   CONTEXT



of information that helps prevent you from getting lost. A
progress bar printed on each page of this book, although favor-
ably kitsch, would be overkill.
     There is an important tradeoΩ between being completely
lost in the unknown and completely found in the familiar. Too
familiar can have the positive aspect of making complete sense,
which to some can seem boring; too unknown can have the neg-
ative connotations of danger, which to some can seem a thrill.
Thus there is a tradeoΩ between being found versus lost:

     how directed can                  how directionless can
      i stand to feel?                    i aΩord to be?

Your feeling of youth, state of health, and sense of adventure
will dictate your preference for safety versus excitement to find
the right balance where you can become “comfortably lost.”
     I personally experienced this sensation of being “comfort-
ably lost” on a recent vacation hike in Maine. I noted that the
trails were marked with rectangles of bright blue paint. Each of
the trails was highly navigable due to its good condition, but
once in a while I would pause and wonder, “Where do I go
next?” And almost like magic one of these blue markers that
previously sat in the background of my perceptual field literal-
ly “popped” into the foreground. With my bearings restored, I
would slowly return to the beautiful, uninterrupted forest vis-
tas with the emotional satisfaction and comfort that one feels
on a mountain hike.
     If the forest were covered with ten times the number of
blue markers I had seen on my hike, the probability of my get-
ting lost would certainly be reduced. One could imagine the

60
               THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



markers organized in some more symbolic shape—say a real
arrow, instead of a cryptic linear marker. And if we wish to go
that far, why not just paint the more explicit text, “This way,” on
the rocks in 100-point Helvetica so there’s no ambiguity what-
soever? Yet at some point, with the successive addition of more
sophisticated elements, the true value of the untainted forest
suddenly vanishes.
     The bridging experience that connects the foreground
and background contexts can be made explicit as in a map, or
less explicit as in the blue painted markers of the forest. Ample
incorporation of empty space removes the need for a specific
bridge between foreground and background because the navi-
gation is implicit—you can’t get lost.
     Complexity implies the feeling of being lost; simplicity
implies the feeling of being found. By the fifth Law of differ-
ences, transitions from simple to complex are a key considera-
tion in the rhythm of feeling. In this sixth Law, we ask what
happens between the beats, and question where you might be
in the progress of the song. Once you have properly situated
yourself, you’re completely free to get lost in the rhythm.




                                                                61
LAW   7
                            Law 7
                           emotion


        More emotions are better than less.




Simplicity can be considered ugly. Take my mother who
absolutely despises anything of neutral color or minimalist
form. She wants neon flowers, bejeweled frogs, and other dec-
orative essentials. When it comes to aesthetics, she’s all about
the “bling.”
     From a rational perspective, simplicity makes good eco-
nomic sense. Simple objects are easier and less expensive to
produce, and those savings can be translated directly to the
consumer with desirable low prices. As evidenced by the
extremely aΩordable line of simple products from furniture
retailer Ikea, simplicity benefits the frugal shopper. However,
there are some people, like my mother, who would say that sim-
plicity is not only cheap, but would add that it looks cheap as
well. A strong sense of self expression belies all of us humans,
and many such decisions we make are not driven by logic alone.
     The seventh Law is not for everyone—there will always be
the die-hard Modernists who refuse any object that is not white
or black, or else with clear or mirrored surfaces. My mother
finds the iPod entirely unattractive. And while the older gener-

                                                              63
                      LAW    7   /   EMOTION



ation isn’t Apple’s targeted market (for the moment, at least), I
am still the dutiful son I was raised to be, and so I find the sev-
enth Law a necessary component in the simplicity toolbox.
More emotions are better than less. When emotions are consid-
ered above everything else, don’t be afraid to add more orna-
ment or layers of meaning.
     I realize this seems to contradict the first Law of reduce.
But I use a specific principle to determine just the right kind of
more: “feel, and feel for.” Everything starts from being sensitive
to your own feelings. Do you know how you feel? Right now? By
connecting with the emotional intelligence inside yourself, the
next step is to empathize with the environment that surrounds
you. “Form follows function” gives way to the more emotion-
led approach to design: “Feeling follows form.” In this section
we talk about emotion and the move towards complexity (and
away from simplicity) that it sometimes requires.


FEEL,   AND   FEEL    FOR:   E-TIQUETTE



I’ve been emailing since 1984 when I arrived at MIT as a fresh-
man. Although some fellow classmates had experience using
Compuserve, the predecessor to online service companies like
AOL, the concept of the network seemed quite foreign to me. I
soon realized that everyone that mattered then had this odd
device called a “modem” to connect to the computer network.
So I got one and quickly became enslaved. I would check my
email not just as a habit, but in lieu of breathing—my unhealthy
fixation still haunts me. Which reminds me … There. That one
deep breath I just took will take care of the rest of the day ;-).

64
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     The smiley at the end of the paragraph causes the familiar
tilt of the head to the left, and reveals a light touch of visual
emotion. The Internet tells me that the smiley may have been
invented in 1982 by a Mr. Scott Fahlman, currently at Carnegie
Mellon University. I find it odd that in the long history of type-
set text going back to Gutenberg that this invention had not
happened sooner. The act of writing by hand doesn’t lend itself
to the use of smileys, however in the age of the typewritten let-
ter, one would have expected to stumble upon the funny com-
bination of characters that can make a wide variety of silly faces
like :-) 8^) ;-o =) |-D and so forth.
     Why have smileys evolved? Why does the textual medium
need such baroque flourishes? Because of the human need to
better express emotion—to capture the nuances of communica-
tion that we take for granted in speech. Interfacing through
text, speaking to other disembodied voices, it is easy to stray
from normal social mores. Smileys evolved as a way to temper
and soften textual conversations without the facial cues speak-
ers use to signify when they are “just kidding.” And although
sending photos is now possible, text continues to dominate.
     My daughters send me email with text of all sizes, all col-
ors, and sometimes in ALL CAPS! Not only does this seem to
make their job of typing of email unnecessarily complex, it
hurts my eyes! However I wholeheartedly accept their high-
fidelity messages as I know their youthful exuberance cannot
be contained by simple text messages alone. Does not the
phrase “I love you!” have so much more meaning when typed,
“I LOVE YOU!”? Think of it typed at 36 points in pink and
bright yellow and it really can go over the top.

                                                               65
                       LAW    7   /   EMOTION



     Much is said about the development from child to adult as
a gradual process of neutering emotional output. Having the
privilege of fostering minds and developing young careers on a
daily basis, I can see evidence of people pressing the mute but-
ton on emotion every day. I once asked one of my students at
MIT why she never smiled when communicating with others.
She said, “Because I don’t want to look unprofessional.”
     This event caused me to reflect on my own attempts to
project professionalism as a professor, which caused a natural
lean towards the stereotypical stern and authoritative. As an
artist, I found the results of my self-analysis oΩensive. Thus,
today I try to reply back to my daughters in all-caps and color-
ful letters when nobody’s looking, “I LOVE YOU TOO!!!”


FEEL,    AND    FEEL    FOR:      NUDE   ELECTRONICS



When I first started a blog at MIT, I discovered that the most
frequently accessed entry was the one entitled “nude electron-
ics.” I could imagine the disappointment that a thrill-seeking
geek might have had with my fully dressed prose.
      By “nude electronics” I refer to the trend of making hand-
held consumer electronic objects smooth, seamless, and small
to satisfy the market’s demand for simplicity. Using methods
such as she, designers can simplify an object to its core and
spare mysteriousness. But like a sheep that has been fleeced,
you can’t help wonder if she is responsible for making the skin-
ny little objects feel a tad bit cold.
     The booming market for protective and decorative iPod
accessories solves this problem—but it also raises a peculiar

66
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



question. Why, after people are drawn to the simplicity of a
device, do they rush to accessorize it? Why, as I browse the air-
port gadget store while waiting for a flight, do I see so many
businessmen perusing Treo cases made of metal, plastic,
leather, and cloth with the intensity of my younger daughters’
choosing outfits for their Barbies?
     Carrying cases for the simplicity object achieve two
important goals. First of all, while she can make an object
smaller, thereby alleviating the natural fear associated with
larger and more complex machines, the successful application
of she can instill a diΩerent kind of fear: concern for the
object’s survival. For instance, a student of mine is afraid to
carry around his ultra-slim iPod Nano for fear of snapping it in
half by accident. An iPod case provides needed protection for
the pitifully undernourished and gaunt device.
     The second reason is rooted in self-expression and in the
need to balance the subzero coolness of the ideal consumer
electronics gadget with a sense of human warmth. While the
core object retains its pure, simple, and cool nakedness; its
clothing can keep it warm, vivacious, and simply outrageous if
so intended. The combination of a simple object together with
a host of optional accessories gives consumers the benefit of
expressing their feelings and feelings for their objects.


FEEL,    AND   FEEL    FOR:   AICHAKU



Growing up, my siblings and I were taught that everything in
our environment, including inanimate objects, had a living spir-
it that deserved respect. “Even a cup?” we asked. “Even a desk?”

                                                               67
                      LAW   7   /   EMOTION



“Even a chewing gum wrapper?” “Even the house we live in?”
The answer was always, “Yes.”
     Under this strict code of life, my taking a clean sheet of
paper, crumpling it up, and throwing it away was grounds for
punishment. I would be denying the paper’s existence to per-
form a useful task, and divine retribution would result from the
disrespect I had shown the paper. My family’s belief system was
based upon an extreme form of Shintoism, which is the ancient
Japanese tradition of animism.
     Believing that all things around you—rocks, river, moun-
tain, and clouds—are somehow “alive” was something that I
couldn’t grasp as a child. However as an adult, I prefer the
world with its mysteries intact and I find myself comfortable
with the thought. In many animated works from Japan, like the
work of acclaimed animator Hayao Miyazaki, the belief in the
spirit living within all objects is, pun intended, alive and well.
     Technology has helped to extend the illusion of life in a
literal sense with robots that walk, talk, and even dance. Sony’s
AIBO robotic dog is constructed of plastic, motors, and a
sophisticated computer. It obviously isn’t a living dog, yet some
AIBO owners relate to it almost as a real pet—gently stroking
and coo-ing to them as if to express love for an animate, but
non-living consumer product.
     The Tamagocchi craze of the late 1990s also showed that
anyone could fall in love with a small electronic keychain unit
that yearned for human attention. Our yearning to care for
what is purely imaginary extends to Neopets on the Web today
where millions of cartoon characters are bred, fed, and loved.
Although it contradicts traditional predominant Western reli-

68
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



gious beliefs, a kind of digital animism appears to be an accept-
able and growing practice among our technologically empow-
ered youths. If one can love an on-screen monster or a digital
baby encapsulated in a little electronic box, is it so far a stretch
to love and respect a plain piece of paper?
     Modernism is the design movement that led to the clean,
industrial look of many objects in our environment. It rejected
unnecessary ornament in favor of exposing an object’s truth
through the raw materials of its production. Japan’s rich tradi-
tion of almost perfectly crafted artifacts of wood and clay seems
built on the same design principles as Modernism. However a
hidden facet of Japanese design is this animistic theme. The
precise lacquered surfaces of a bento box are more than just a
fact of fine production; these surfaces—and the bento box that
they comprise—are essentially alive. The inanimate box is
accorded its own spiritual existence. There can be a natural
emotional attachment to the object’s life force that is a kind of
deep, hidden ornamentation known to only those who feel it.



                         ai (love) chaku (fit)
     Aichaku (ahy-chaw-koo) is the Japanese term for the
sense of attachment one can feel for an artifact. When written
by its two kanji characters, you can see that the first character
means “love” and the second one means “fit.” “Love-fit”
describes a deeper kind of emotional attachment that a person
can feel for an object. It is a kind of symbiotic love for an object
that deserves aΩection not for what it does, but for what it is.
Acknowledging the existence of aichaku in our built environ-

                                                                 69
                      LAW    7   /   EMOTION



ment helps us to aspire to design artifacts that people will feel
for, care for, and own for a lifetime.


THE   ART   OF   MORE



In November of 2005 an exhibition of my digital art opened at
the Fondation Cartier in Paris. Opening at the same time was a
show of work by Australian artist Ron Mueck, a soft-spoken
and intense man famous for his large-scale but incredibly life-
like sculptures. The individual hairs, the shining eyes, the skin
painted with veins—every detail is perfect.
      So perfect that, as you approach one of Mueck’s pieces,
you ask yourself, “Is it real?” As your hand reaches out to
confirm the warmth of the human form before you, your mind
tells you that the sculpted giant cannot exist.
      The best art makes your head spin with questions.
Perhaps this is the fundamental distinction between pure art
and pure design. While great art makes you wonder, great
design makes things clear.
      Sometimes, though, clarity alone is not the best design
solution. At my opening in Paris, an old friend from Milan told
me of a powerful socialite who was diagnosed with cancer.
While she was still reeling from the shock of the news, her
physician informed her of his ten-minute time limit for
appointments. Even in her fragile state, she would have to leave,
so that he could deliver similar messages to waiting patients.
Here, the extremely e≈cient design of his communication sys-
tem lacked any appreciation for the ambiguous dimensions of
feelings—the stuΩ of art.

70
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Afterwards, this brave woman came up with a solution
that could bridge the gap between message and emotion. With
five months left to live, she started a foundation to create
intensely artful, beautifully designed centers near oncology
units, where those first facing death can soak their minds and
hearts. Art—a reason to live—is tempered with design—the clar-
ity of message.
     Achieving clarity isn’t di≈cult. The Italian woman’s
oncologist had easily mastered it. The true challenge is achiev-
ing comfort.
     Emotional intelligence is now considered an important
facet of leaders today, and the expression of emotion is no
longer considered a weakness but a desirable human trait to
which everyone can immediately relate. Our society, systems,
and artifacts require active engagement in care, attention, and
feeling—the business value may not be immediately apparent.
But the fulfillment from living a meaningful life is the ROE
(Return on Emotion). A certain kind of more is always better
than less—more care, more love, and more meaningful actions.
I don’t think I need to say anything more really.




                                                              71
LAW   8
                              Law 8
                              trust


                  In simplicity we trust.




Imagine an electronic device with only one unlabeled button on
its surface. Pressing the button would complete your immedi-
ate task. Do you want to write a letter to Aunt Mabel? Go ahead
and press the button. Click. A letter has been sent. You know
with absolute certainty that it went out and expressed exactly
what you needed. That’s simplicity. And we are not far from
that reality.
     Every day the computer becomes increasingly smarter. It
already knows your name, address, and credit card number.
Knowing where Aunt Mabel lives and having watched you
write a letter to her before, the computer can send a fair
approximation of a kindly email to her from you. Just click a
button and the deed could be done—finito. Whether the mes-
sage is coherent and keeps you on dear Aunt Mabel’s Christmas
list is another story, but that is the price of not having to think.
In simplicity we trust.
     Hosting an email account on Yahoo! or MSN means that
you can easily access your email from anywhere in the world.
Another advantage is that the email service can customize itself

                                                                 73
                        LAW   8   /   TRUST



based on your contact list and the kind of messages you send
most often. For instance, a “send to Aunt Mabel” button can
automatically appear just before her birthday. It is easy to for-
get, however, that the entire details of your e-social life are
exposed to a company, or potentially a government, outside of
your direct control.
     The question is how comfortable you are about the com-
puter knowing how you think, and then how tolerant you will
be if (and when) the computer makes a mistake in guessing
your desires. Most people would gladly give up some of the rote
details of their life to have more free time, as expressed in the
third Law. But is the risk of placing trust in the devices around
you worth the simplicity gained? The issue of privacy in the
digital age cannot be resolved in these next few pages, and thus
we approach the issue of trust in a simpler manner.


RELAX.   LEAN    BACK



Learning how to swim as an adult was not easy. As an MIT
undergraduate, I had managed to slip past the swimming
requirement by showing that I could stand up in the pool. After
leaving MIT, I tried all sorts of swimming programs to no avail.
The return experience of learning how to swim at MIT was
more successful. I admit that as a professor, taking swimming
class with freshmen was kind of odd. I had just joined the MIT
faculty and something about a swimming suit and goggles made
me look more like an older student than a professor so I blend-
ed in quite well. I would be asked, “What major are you?” by the
other students in the class. I kept my secret quiet.

74
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     My unorthodox swimming teacher did not teach us how
to swim. He instead spent most of the term teaching us how to
“lean back” and trust the water. I kept waiting to learn how to
swim, but in the meantime became more comfortable just lean-
ing back or bending over forward in the water. A formative
moment occurred when he told us to go ahead and flap our
arms and feet, and suddenly I was swimming! I realized I could
always swim—I just didn’t trust the water.
     I was reminded of my swimming epiphany recently when
I had the fortune of meeting the innovation director of Danish
stereomaker Bang & Olufsen. As the Maserati of consumer elec-
tronics in style, attitude, and price, B&O struck me as an impor-
tant data point in my search for understanding simplicity. Their
legendary remote control (discussed in the first Law) embodies
such qualities of simplicity as careful organization and atten-
tion to contrast. I was eager to engage in a discussion of sim-
plicity that could help me understand the logic or, better yet,
the spirit of the design philosophy that renders consumer elec-
tronics as high art. The answer, as it turned out, was simple.
     B&O doesn’t focus on the quality of sound, but on the
quality of leaning back ... and just enjoying something. This was
an unexpected lesson, but is consistent with the peripheral
focus of the sixth Law. The goal of lean back is to achieve
relaxation as the desired state, upon which audio and video can
gradually invade, but not with intent to intrude. We can only
truly relax when we trust that we’re in the finest hands and are
treated with the best intentions. A B&O system instills the same
immersive trust that we grant to the water in the pool when we
lean back and float.

                                                                 75
                       LAW   8   /   TRUST



     Being able to lean back and relax often seems impossible
in our competitive society. B&O’s exquisite design inspires you
to lower your guard. Their extraordinary attention to detail
melts fear into safety—causing you to float away in its care.
     That is, until your bliss is interrupted by your spouse and
a no-no finger pointing to an outrageous charge on the credit
card. The premium price of the B&O lean back experience is
daunting, but consider that it is available at a lower price point
in a park near you on a nice warm day where a bed of green
grass has your name on it. Just lean back, for free.


TRUST   THE   MASTER



The power of the negative media around the food industry
drives my mind to enact a Woody Allen-ish skit whenever faced
with a restaurant menu. For instance, beef translates to “mad
cow disease,” chicken morphs into “avian flu,” fish reconstitutes
to “mercury poisoning,” and vegetarian option becomes “genet-
ically modified crops.” I am unsure what to pick, and moreover
who I can trust when my selection is made.
     An alternative to such menu stress is available in better
sushi restaurants where you can ask for the omakase (oh-maw-
kaw-say) course. Omakase translates roughly to “I leave it up to
you” where “you” refers to the sushi chef. The process is sim-
ple. The sushi chef looks at you, does a rough analysis of your
general disposition, reflects upon the season and the day’s
weather, factors into consideration the variety of fish he has
available in his arsenal, forms a rough idea for the optimal
menu, starts the process of delivering the meal in measured

76
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



increments, attentively observes your reaction, and tweaks the
meal accordingly.
     There is usually a fixed price for this special service by the
sushi chef, but there is no shame in specifying your general cost
parameters. The trick to the culinary satisfaction of omakase is
not directly linked to cost but instead to the chef’s confidence
in his studied craft. This form of egotistical self belief is rooted
in the Master’s “manly pride,” or konjo (kohn-joe)—which is
likely more important than his own life, or at least so the lore of
the Master goes.
     The Western equivalent of omakase is the “chef’s menu.”
From appetizer to main entrée to dessert, an exquisite choice of
two or three options is oΩered each step of the way. Thus the
chef’s menu results in a great meal because the best dishes of
the evening are put forward.
     However, there are a few critical diΩerences between the
chef’s menu and the omakase process. For example, the chef’s
menu is a lower risk approach because ultimately the blame for
any mistake is on the diner for the choices they make for each
course; the omakase approach is higher risk because the com-
plete responsibility resides with the Master. Furthermore, in
the chef’s menu approach the cook is in the kitchen, far
removed from the process of ordering, and unable to assess
whether the meal oΩered will perfectly fit the needs of the
diner. Instead in the omakase case, the diner sits only a few feet
away from the sushi Master, and thus the Master’s duel for win-
ning the diner’s tastebuds can have a life-or-death quality.
     Vanity is a high risk sport that raises the stakes when all
you can oΩer to a client is your word and your reputation as a

                                                                 77
                       LAW    8   /   TRUST



Master. Overconfidence is usually the enemy of greatness, and
there’s little room for personal ego when pleasing a customer is
the true priority. But there’s something to be said for the sushi
Master’s confidence. He knows with 100% accuracy that he will
give a diner what she wants if she is willing to submit to his
mastery and expertise.
     Perhaps the omakase course is a form of subjection to culi-
nary sadism—a gastronomic deviance that faces extinction in a
progressively risk averse world. A sushi Master does not
acknowledge risk; he has no fear. He has earned the trust of his
customer, or else will fight literally with his bare hands to earn
it when given the opportunity. Simplicity is achieved through
the heroism of the trusted Master because in his sushi, we trust.


JUST   UNDO   IT.



It’s the winter holiday season and you are buying a present for
a friend. For each gift, you are issued a gift receipt that she can
use to undo the purchase, exchanging it for a diΩerent one.
Upon exchanging it, she can then be issued another receipt,
with which she could exchange the gift again.
     Knowing that a purchase is correctable later makes the
shopping process simpler because you know that any decision
made is not final. Indeed, today’s customers don’t expect to be
held accountable for their purchases. Eager to build consumer
trust in their brands, companies are willing to assume the extra
risk inherent in a returnable purchase. The losses incurred by
the cost of returned goods are outweighed by the gains in cus-
tomer trust. This is the power of undo.

78
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Computer tools give us the option to undo often, and now
infinitely. Digital media is a forgiving media. Any visual mark,
spoken utterance, or typed word entered into the digital
domain can just as easily be removed. People have diΩerent
opinions on the magic of undo. Some believe that the feature
makes people more creative by allowing them to take more
risks; others assert that undo makes people less creative
because they don’t think through ideas but rather create by
happenstance. Which stance you take depends upon whether
you are the sushi Master or just the average Joe.
     From time to time I find myself romanticizing the old-
fashioned typewriter and the messy little bottles of white cor-
rection fluid—the paper equivalent of undo. But a modern word
processor is a comfort that I would be an idiot … undo … remiss
to give up. A product that can correct our mistakes as they hap-
pen performs an important service and gains our trust. Undo is
the welcome antidote to the average Joe’s lack of optimism. In
the end we can’t all be the sushi Master.
     The fourth Law of learn asserts the power of knowledge,
which underlies the Master’s ability to confidently execute any
task without a crutch like undo. We trust that his skills are
absolute and unerring—otherwise, why call him “Master” in
the first place? Similarly, the self-assured design of a B&O
stereo system allows you to lean back and relax in the care of
the Master machine. Trusting a power greater than our own is
a custom that is ingrained from birth when the adults that care
for us provide the ultimate experience of simplicity. Every need
and desire is met by a parent; and in return, beyond just oΩering
our trust, we entrust our love.

                                                              79
                       LAW      8   /   TRUST



     On the contrary, undo is not about love, but simply a rela-
tionship of convenience. Power is equally balanced between
experience and user such that neither side has the upper hand.
There can be no relationship of depth because every interaction
can be completely rewound to the beginning. Thus commit-
ment is rendered meaningless when for every action, there is a
corresponding un-action. In contrast to the trusting relation-
ship with a Master, the power of undo results in a feeling of
simplicity that is rooted in not having to care at all. Although
there is something morally sad about this interpretation, undo
is not the enemy. Embrace undo as a rational partner in main-
taining the many complex relationships with the objects in
your environment. But put the undo button away when dealing
with real people if possible.


TRUST   ME



As predicted in the third Law of time, Google’s “I’m feeling
lucky” button, which aims to take you to the single page you are
looking for, will never be wrong and it will no longer need luck.
Instead, Google will rely on its knowledge of your past habits to
predict your current needs or desires. Searching for “soup”?
You’re probably searching for Campbell’s soup because that’s
the soup most recently stocked in your smart pantry. Searching
for “good book”? You probably will be looking for books similar
to what you’ve purchased in the past. Amazon.com already has
this suggestion engine, and although it isn’t 100% accurate,
increased computing power in the future will only aid
machines trying to understand each of our particular quirks.

80
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     The more a system knows about you, the less you have to
think. Conversely, the more you know about the system, the
greater control you can exact. Thus the dilemma for the future
use of any product or service is resolving the following point of
balance for the user:

     how much do you                      how much does
       need to know                          the system
      about a system?                     know about you?

On the left hand side, eΩort is required to learn and master the
system; on the right hand side, trust must be oΩered to the sys-
tem, and that trust must be consistently repaid. Privacy is
sacrificed for extra convenience when following the Master’s
lead. Alternatively, undo allows us to become the Masters our-
selves by gently learning to trust our own knowledge of a sys-
tem. The placement of faith goes many ways.
     On a final note on trust, years ago while in graduate school
I had an o≈cemate with a particularly cynical perspective. One
day he warned me, “John, when someone says to you, ‘Trust
me,’ replace every instance of that phrase with, ‘F*ck you.’”
Somebody asking you for their trust was, he believed, implicit-
ly giving you the shaft. At the time I was the picture of naiveté,
and afterwards I had di≈culty undo-ing this naughty concept
from my mind. For simplicity’s sake, I’ve since learned to trust
unquestionably in spite of my o≈cemate’s advice, but I am open
to undo-ing that trust whenever deserved.




                                                               81
LAW   9
                             Law 9
                            failure


      Some things can never be made simple.




The truth embodied in the ninth Law is something I could have
chosen to hide, but the eighth Law of trust commands me to
speak. Some things can never be made simple. Knowing that sim-
plicity can be elusive in certain cases is an opportunity to make
more constructive use of your time in the future, instead of
chasing after an apparently impossible goal. However there’s
no harm in initiating the search for simplicity even when suc-
cess is deemed as too costly or otherwise out of reach.
     There’s always an ROF (Return On Failure) when you try
to simplify—which is to learn from your mistakes. When faced
with failure, a good artist, or any other member of the creative
class, leverages the unfortunate event to radically shift perspec-
tive. One man’s failed experiment in simplicity can be another
man’s success as a beautiful form of complexity. Simplicity and
complexity shift with subtle changes in point of view.
     Concentrate on the deep beauty of a flower. Notice the
many thin, delicate strands that emanate from the center and
the sublime gradations of hue that occur even in the simplest
white blossom. Complexity can be beautiful. At the same time,
the beautiful simplicity of planting a seed and just adding water

                                                               83
                             LAW     9   /     FAILURE



  lies at even the most complex flower’s beginning. A relatively
  simple bit of computer code can produce surprisingly complex
  visual art. Conversely, Google’s complex network of servers and
  algorithms produces a simple search experience. Deeming
  something as complex or simple requires a frame of reference.
         There are certain things that I would never want to
  become simple—that includes my close relationships and my
  collection of art. Complexity and simplicity are two symbiotic
  qualities. As raised in the fifth Law of differences, each needs
  the other—its respective definition depends upon the other’s
  existence. To realize a world of complete simplicity would
  mean that complexity would have to become completely eradi-
  cated. And with only simplicity remaining, how would you
  know what is truly simple? Thus failing to achieve simplicity is
  an important service to humanity.
         Failure happens. If not 3.4 times out of a million, then at
  least one time today for you or me. I began my personal trek
  towards simplicity just at the turn of this century, and I am the
  first to admit that I do not have all the answers. Some of my
  thoughts will inevitably be deemed as wrong. But the impa-
  tience embodied by the third Law of time compels me to pub-
  lish this book right now even with its unresolved flaws.


  THE    FLAWS      OF   SIMPLICITY            1:   ACRONYM   OVERLOAD



1 reduce The simplest way to achieve simplicity is through thoughtful reduction.
2 organize Organization can make a system of many, appear fewer.
3 time Savings in time feel like simplicity.
4 learn Knowledge makes everything simpler.

  84
         JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



  In developing a methodology to support the first Law, I had a
  choice of she (shrink, hide, embody) or her (hide, embody,
  remove). Pronoun versus adjective is the first diΩerence, and I
  thought of integrating the two parts of speech into the discus-
  sion. For instance, I played with being able to refer to her and
  she interchangeably in the first Law’s development. But it was
  the remove in her that made me remove her in favor of she.
  Already I can see that I was correct to select only one, as this
  now sounds a bit like Abbott and Costello’s famous “Who’s on
  First?” comedy routine.
         Later in the second Law of organize I introduced slip
  (sort, label, integrate, prioritize), brought back she for
  the third Law, and then tried to discretely insert my brain in
  the fourth Law of learn when I thought you weren’t looking.
  Acronyms are a great way to simplify complex ideas, but the
  monotony of YAA (Yet Another Acronym) is too much to bear.


  THE    FLAWS      OF   SIMPLICITY         2:   BAD    GESTALTS



5 diΩerences Simplicity and complexity need each other.
6 context What lies in the periphery of simplicity is definitely not peripheral.
7 emotion More emotions are better than less.
8 trust In simplicity we trust.


  As the Laws progress in the book, the themes become increas-
  ingly ambiguous. In the second Law I introduce the concept of
  gestalt—or the ability of the mind to “fill in the blank”—which
  justifies my approach to allow creative interpretation. However
  this open explanation can be confusing if taken logically.

                                                                                   85
                      LAW   9   /   FAILURE



     The fifth Law of differences implies that there is a har-
mony between simple and complex that is achieved through
human instinct. Everyone’s instinct is diΩerent, and thus a sin-
gle answer is not readily available to achieve the optimal bal-
ance between simplicity and complexity. For the same reason
that there are a variety of musical styles like classical, rock, and
hip-hop to satisfy diΩerences in culture, curiosity, and fad, the
rhythm of simplicity will be varied.
     Next, in the sixth Law of context I tell you to avoid the
existing problem and to instead, look at the overall context of
the situation. This approach may sound a bit irresponsible
because it seems to imply that you should ignore the task at
hand. Actually, the sixth Law doesn’t suggest a path of direct
neglect, but instead advocates concentrating on the invisible
chasm that bridges the foreground task and its background
context. However since this bridge I refer to is imperceptible, it
doesn’t seem fair for me to ask you to point your attention at
what appears to be nothing. Also I imagine it doesn’t help to say
that “nothing is something” because it seems like I am making
something out of absolutely nothing, which I am.
     When emotions are a priority, and deep feelings come into
play, I eschew the importance of complexity as delivered by
pouring on more decoration, more glamour, and generally more
flavor. Thus the seventh Law of emotion can be misinterpret-
ed as saying that pure and simple experiences are sterile and
devoid of feeling. It all depends on your personality and the
mood that you wear at the exact moment of engagement.
Sometimes you prefer clarity, and sometimes you prefer chaos.
The seventh Law reserves your right to change your mind.

86
        JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



        Finally in the eight Law of trust, I refer to the sushi
  Master as a persona worthy of absolute faith. Within almost the
  same breath, I espouse undo as the desirable power of not hav-
  ing to trust your own actions. Relieving yourself of pressure can
  feel fantastic, so why wouldn’t a sushi Master want his own
  form of undo key sitting next to the sushi bar? Magnificent indi-
  viduals in jobs that demand maximum performance of them-
  selves tend to deny themselves the perceived weakness of the
  undo crutch, but it doesn’t mean that they don’t know how to
  relax. After all, that’s what sake’s for.


  THE   FINAL    FLAW:     TOO   MANY    LAWS



9 failure Some things can never be made simple.


  When I initially set my goal on the Laws of Simplicity, I began
  with a target of sixteen—knowing that it was too many. After a
  few iterations of slip, I reduced the number to nine Laws
  which is in the attractive single digit category. Further integra-
  tion of the Laws into a smaller set is feasible I suppose, but not
  necessary at this very moment because their evolution contin-
  ues on the companion website lawsofsimplicity.com.
        For the enjoyment of the simplicity purist that demands
  fewer guiding principles, I provide a single Law to remember as
  described in the following tenth Law: the one.




                                                                 87
LAW   10
                             Law 10
                            the one


   Simplicity is about subtracting the obvious,
          and adding the meaningful.




The Japan National Rugby Team was once a mighty force that
has fallen in recent years. Led by a new French coach, Jean-
Pierre Elissalde, they appear to be on the rise. When Ellisalde
first came aboard, he assessed the team’s basic problem—the
players were too predictable. As they moved up the field, the
ball was passed between team members with a mechanical
accuracy that was easy for their opponents to predict, and thus
consistently topple. Elissalde urged his players “to become like
the bubbles in a glass of champagne,” floating upward in unex-
pected and elegantly fluid ways. The Japanese team had to
learn how to operate based upon intuition versus intellect.
     Simplicity is hopelessly subtle, and many of its defining
characteristics are implicit (noting that it hides in simplicity).
Drinking deeply from Ellisalde’s champagne approach led me
to a single, simplified expression: Simplicity is about subtracting
the obvious, and adding the meaningful.
     Ten laws (10: one, zero), remove none (0: zero), and you’re
left with one (10: one). When in doubt, turn to the tenth Law:
the one. It’s simpler that way.

                                                                89
             3   KEYS   /   AWAY,     OPEN, POWER



After slip-ping my observations into the ten Laws of Simplicity,
I found that several ideas didn’t fit neatly into any single Law.
They did, however, cluster around three specific technologies
with particular relevance to the subject of simplicity. Originally,
I thought of reduce-ing the book by removing these three sec-
tions. But in discussions with a variety of business leaders I felt
that they weren’t completely obvious so by the one Law I have
kept them here.



                              Key 1
                              Away


               More appears like less
          by simply moving it far, far away.

I cannot forget the moment, on a cold New England night in
1984 in the comfort of a friend’s dorm room, when I watched
him type some magical incantation into the computer terminal
that allowed him to jump from a mainframe computer at MIT
to another mainframe at Columbia University. “No way!” I said.
His steely reply was a monotonic Keanu Reeves-ish, “Yes way.”
     Because the university’s big central computers were more
powerful than the then new personal computers, many of the
tech-savvy students opted for lower cost data terminals—a text
display with no computational power of its own but the ability
to connect to more powerful machines. There was a kind of
macho-ness to having less on your actual physical desktop, but
being able to do more remotely.

90
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     Desktop computers today have as much processing power
as that central MIT mainframe we jacked into decades ago. Yet
with less than one percent of the average desktop computer’s
processing capabilities, your basic word processing and spread-
sheet applications can run comfortably. Despite this fact, with
so much memory and horsepower available, today’s applica-
tions have become bloated. What could once be installed from
a single floppy disk grew to fill an entire CD, then a set of CD’s,
then a DVD, and now multiple DVD’s.
     When these supersized tanks of data are poured into the
computer, the equivalent of an accidental oil spill is likely to
occur in the ocean of virtual information. The result is a com-
puter that is no longer spry as the day it was unpackaged, or in
the worst case it can’t even start up. Maintaining an up-to-date
computer can feel like a full-time job for its owner.
     A revolution is occurring that looks a bit like a devolu-
tion—the simple model of the data terminal is regaining popu-
larity not for its macho-coolness aspects, but for its appeal to
common sense. Rather than deal with a stack of CD’s or net-
work downloads to keep the computer on your desk going, why
not simply access software on a remote computer?
     Think of the power of Google which runs from a simple,
lightweight text input box in your web browser to access
Google’s vast network of computers and databases. You are
spared having to house your own massive racks of computing
equipment required to process a Google query. More appears
like less by simply moving it far, far away. Thus an experience is
made simpler by keeping the result local, and moving the actu-
al work to a far away location.

                                                                91
             3   KEYS   /   AWAY,     OPEN, POWER



     This model of computer applications running remotely is
gaining popularity and is called “software as a service.” Google
is free (for now), but one could imagine it as a future service
whereby we pay per query or on a monthly basis because of the
value received. Don’t forget the convenience of not having to
maintain or manage the computational horsepower to run the
software locally. Already business-focused software systems for
running spreadsheets, managing projects, and maintaining cus-
tomer relationships, like the popular Salesforce.com, are avail-
able as services on the Web. Not only do these systems feel
simpler by being hosted far away, but they also importantly
acknowledge the fact that we live in a mobile world where
we’re often away from the o≈ce or home.
     Fundamental to the eΩectiveness of away is how to main-
tain reliable communication with an outsourced task. A web-
enabled phone is only good when it can reliably access the
network. Conversely, a remotely hosted service needs to be
resistant to the latest virus or hacker attack. It is comforting to
think that even in the 21st century, the question of how to main-
tain a long distance relationship continues to flourish.


                              Key 2
                              open


           Openness simplifies complexity.

Being truly open in our open society can be risky business.
People routinely risk emotional pain when they expose them-
selves with the simple words, “I love you.” When the response

92
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



is positive, the angels sing and fairies dance in the air; when the
response is negative, the angels and fairies have left town to
never come back. In the parlance of the business world, pro-
fessing your love for someone is a high risk, high reward oppor-
tunity. As a person happily engaged in a relationship that has
lasted for more than fifteen years now, I’m glad to have taken
the risk.
     Companies don’t tend to profess love in the same way, but
there is increasing pressure on businesses to design products to
be more open. Opening a proprietary system, much like pro-
fessing one’s love, is a high risk activity that a company posting
quarterly-earning figures often cannot aΩord. Who might mis-
use the information? What if our competitors leverage our
company secrets? Why would a consumer buy what they could
now easily make themselves? Giving away what is perceived to
be the core protectable value—i.e. know-how, or “intellectual
property”—does not make sense when tremendous eΩorts and
investments have gone into realizing a successful product.
     In the technology world, the “open source” model—in
which source code, the equivalent of a software’s blueprints, is
made publicly available—is championed as a way to generate
software that is not only free, but more robust than most soft-
ware available on the market. The best-known example is
Linux, an operating system that competes with Microsoft
Windows. While Linux is free and open source, Windows is
for-pay and closed source.
     I once heard a Linux expert on the radio explaining that
when Windows is broken you cannot fix it yourself because the
source is closed, whereas with Linux you can. This is fairly mis-

                                                                93
             3   KEYS   /   AWAY,   OPEN, POWER



leading, actually, because as computer programs go, Linux is
extremely complex. Even with access to the code, your average
computer user wouldn’t be able to fix a bug. That requires an
expert. However, there are thousands of Linux experts on the
Net at any time that can respond to common problems such as
security flaws. These experts are more likely to jump into
action before you’d even get to a real Microsoft employee on the
phone. Openness simplifies complexity. With an open system,
the power of the many can outweigh the power of the few.
     A second model of open source that is more palatable to
businesses not wanting to give away their source code is to oΩer
an Application Programming Interface, or “API.” Amazon.com
was an early pioneer of this approach—oΩering open access to
its running components, instead of the actual source code,
through the Amazon.com API. This API enables any person on
the Web to design and build her own book store. Another exam-
ple is the Google Maps API that lets other programmers build
new apps like a route planner for runners or a real estate map.
     An API is thus a selective approach to open systems where
the functionality, instead of the actual blueprints as in open
source, is oΩered to the general community to the extent that
excess processing capacity can be made available. Note that this
functionality is usually oΩered to the community free of charge.
     According to the eighth Law, a deep form of simplicity is
rooted in trust. Any book on salesmanship will tell you that
trust forms the basis of a strong business relationship. Open
systems place unique demands on the economics of trust. If the
adage, “it is better to give than receive,” rings true to you, then
the long run gains associated with an open system will also be

94
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



obvious to you. If conventional capitalism is your compass, and
to hear “trust me” translates to “f*ck you,” then you will likely
choose the closed approach. However, there are signs that a
“for free” open approach can lead to a “for a fee” approach. For
example, the popular “Ruby on Rails” Web framework by 37sig-
nals is completely free, but related for-pay services are sold
simultaneously. The case on open is open, indeed.


                               Key 3
                              power


                    Use less, gain more.

Every rechargeable device I own is like a new pet that must be
fed. The magic of cordless systems such as mobile phones, lap-
tops, and so forth is freeing, yet there is a toll exacted with each
new device acquired. I know that if I do not feed each device
with energy regularly, batteries begin to discharge and their
e≈cacy will eventually fade.
     I own an iPod but I never really listen to music anymore as
usually I like to listen to the sounds around me. It sits on my
desk and I may turn it on once every few weeks only to realize
its battery is discharged. With the odd, ritual feeling of manag-
ing a critically ill patient, I rush to connect the little fellow up
to the power dongle, and feel relieved when a pulse is visibly
returned. But I know in the back of my mind that one day it will
not revive from its deep sleep due to the finite nature of
rechargeable battery technology. We wear out as humans, so it’s
only fair and natural that batteries should wear out too.

                                                                 95
             3   KEYS   /   AWAY,   OPEN, POWER



     My colleague Prof. Joseph Paradiso is developing new
solutions to the problem of power. He and his team at MIT
have invented a self-powered, wireless switch that harvests the
energy generated during the push of a button to electrically
send a radio-frequency signal. Said another way, the key fob
that activates your car alarm system will not need a battery and
instead will use just the power recovered from your pushing of
the button. It’s just a tiny handheld switch, but it’s arguably one
of the most popular inventions at the Media Lab. A similar
workaround for battery life is seen in extremely low-power
electronic circuitry that enables certain devices to last on a sin-
gle battery for decades. Electronic devices can never be truly
simple unless they are freed from their dependence on power.
A seemingly unpowered electronic device may seem like an
oxymoron, but it is critical to achieve.
     The US is at a turning point in its development. The mer-
curial cost of fuel and its inevitable link to geopolitics make any
discussion of power complex. We need it, and with the contin-
ually growing world population we’ll always want and need
more. A rechargeable battery, or any battery technology for that
matter, has the guise of freedom—it seems to free you from
dependence on an external power. But all power comes from
somewhere and uses energy on its way to the consumer—bat-
teries must be manufactured, ditto with solar panels, oil must
be transported across great distances. The only foreseeable
solution is for humanity to collectively use less energy, and to
use it more wisely. Use less, gain more. A personal sacrifice can
directly translate to a philanthropic act for the world that
although not tax deductible, makes simple sense.

96
     JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



     I practice my own kind of “sustainable computing.” In
recent times I have begun to play a businessman’s equivalent to
the daring game of “chicken” where I see how much life I can
get out of my laptop on a trip without bringing the power cord.
In the field of design there is the belief that with more con-
straints, better solutions are revealed. With only 14 minutes of
charge left on my laptop right now, I find that indeed much
more can get done than when the power is fully connected and
freely available. Urgency and the creative spirit go hand in
hand, and innovation as a positive return is a desirable benefit.
The number of people who will see the benefit of this approach
will determine the terminal point on the progress bar of our
glorious planet Earth. Increased social practices that result in
the use of less power—as well as supporting technology innova-
tions for power harvesting and conservation—stand to realize a
world where the most powerful examples of simplicity are
those that will ironically appear powerless.


     The three Keys of away, open, and power are important
technology markers for the future of simplicity. Openly dis-
cussing and debating the three Keys, and more Keys to come,
continues on the lawsofsimplicity.com.




                                                               97
                               life


          Technology and life only become
             complex if you let it be so.




While drawing with pen and paper in art school, and reaching
for the nonexistent undo key to correct a mistake, I began to
feel that technology was shaping me more than the other way
around. Around the same time, a friend told me about the
thinker, Ivan Illich, and his writings on how the emergence of
professions has disabled the average person. Lawyers solve
problems between people that in the past we resolved our-
selves; doctors cure people, whereas in the past we knew which
plants in the forest had medicinal properties. The lesson I’ve
taken from Illich’s work is that while technology is an exhila-
rating enabler, it can be an exasperating disabler as well.
     For instance, I recall waiting for several days to get a refill
for my label printer when it occurred to me that I could just
write on the file folder with a pen. Or, whenever there’s a ques-
tion about an unknown word my first instinct is to go to diction-
ary.com. But by the time I’ve awakened my computer to type it
in, someone in my house has found it by flipping through an
actual dictionary. I have stood nervously in front of an audience
of hundreds of people held up while my computer unsuccess-
fully talks with the data projector; I then remember that I do a
better job presenting ideas without PowerPoint. The disabling

                                                                 99
                               LIFE



eΩect of technology can be humorous in retrospect. But some-
times I wonder if being a Blackberry-toting cyborg is all that it’s
cracked up to be.
      Every day some of the smartest young people in the world
come to see me in my o≈ce at MIT. Although o≈cially I am
their teacher, I find that I am often their student. For instance,
I remember a student named Marc who volunteered in shelters
for poor people at the end of their lives. Even though he came
from a well-heeled family and could easily turn his back on the
impoverished, Marc said he always felt compelled to help oth-
ers in need. He told me how while working at the shelter, he
noticed that each patient had a single shelf by their bed that
held the total sum of their worldly belongings. Seeing this situ-
ation made him silently ask, “What are the few precious things
that you can aΩord to keep at the end of your life when you
already have so little?” A ring, a photograph, or another small
memento was what he consistently found. Marc poignantly
surmised that memories are all that matter in the end.
      When your entire life is reduced to a single shelf of curios,
what memories might you enshrine? Life may be complex, but
in the end, life is simple if you listen to Marc.
      The ten Laws and three Keys are not the end of my
thoughts about simplicity. Encouraged by those with whom I
have shared these thoughts so far, I plan to continue this mis-
sion. MIT Press has other titles to come in this series on sim-
plicity. The next installment—The Value of Simplicity by the
stunningly insightful Jessie Scanlon—will take a modern busi-
ness focus. If you would like to join the emerging discussion,
please visit lawsofsimplicity.com. I promise to keep it simple.

100
          JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY




                                     TEN LAWS


 1 reduce The simplest way to achieve simplicity is through thoughtful reduction.
 2 organize Organization makes a system of many appear fewer.
 3 time Savings in time feel like simplicity.
 4 learn Knowledge makes everything simpler.
 5 diΩerences Simplicity and complexity need each other.
 6 context What lies in the periphery of simplicity is definitely not peripheral.
 7 emotion More emotions are better than less.
 8 trust In simplicity we trust.
 9 failure Some things can never be made simple.
10 the one Simplicity is about subtracting the obvious, and adding the meaningful.


                                   THREE KEYS


 1 away More appears like less by simply moving it far, far away.
 2 open Openness simplifies complexity.
 3 power Use less, gain more.




                                                                            refrain
                            BOOKS



There are a few books that inspired each of the sections that I
owe the debt of inspiration to mention here. I omit the practice
of listing a bibliographic entry for each item, because the Web
has made it simple to find a book so why make it look complex?


simplicity = sanity
The Tipping Point, by Malcolm Gladwell (2002)
The need for simplicity has reached the tipping point.


reduce
The Paradox of Choice, by Barry Schwartz (2005)
Provides a grounding in why few can be better than many.


organize
Notes on the Synthesis of Form, by Christopher Alexander (1964)
Ideas about organization as originated in architecture.


time
Toyota Production System, by Ohno Taiichi (1988)
Dry treatise on optimizing production from the Toyota Master.


learn
Motivation and Personality, by Abraham Maslow (1970)
What really motivates people?


diΩerences
The Innovator’s Solution, by Clay Christensen (2003)
Simple explanation of changeover eΩects led by technology.
       JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



context
Six Memos for the Next Millennium, by Italo Calvino (1993)
Brilliantly beautiful thoughts on simply everything.


emotion
Emotional Design, by Donald Norman (2003)
Usability guru makes a case for the useless.


trust
The Long Tail, by Chris Anderson (2006)
Adding up all the little things really matters.


away
Technics and Civilization, Lewis Mumford (1963)
Prescient work by a man in touch with his time.


open
The Wisdom of Crowds, by James Surowiecki (2004)
Supports the group outweighing the individual.


power
Cradle to Cradle, by W. McDonough and M. Braungart (2002)
We’re running out of power and something has to be done.


life
Disabling Professions, by Ivan Illich (1978)
Reminds you that you’re becoming increasingly useless.


MAEDA@MEDIA (2001) and Creative Code (2004) document my own creative genesis.
                                  INDEX



I read a scathing review on Amazon.com for a book that did not
include an index and also did not include complete references
for each factoid presented. For LOS, I made a conscious choice
to not make a book that is a compendium of facts because I
don’t feel comfortable with managing that kind of complexity.
An index, on the other hand, I can handle.


;-) vii, 64-65                        Compuserve 64
37signals 95                          The Container Store 11
AIBO 68                               Dali, Salvador 49
aichaku 69                            Dell 29
Alienware 29                          Door to Door 11
Allen, Woody 76                       dot diagrams 18, 20
Amazon.com 26, 80, 94                 Ducasse, Alain 41
AOL 64                                Ellisalde, Jean-Pierre 89
API 94                                Fahlman, Scott 65
Apple ix, 6, 18, 25, 40, 41, 64       Fear Factor 35
Ask.com 7                             FedEx 23
Audi 18                               Ferrari 8
Ban, Shigeru 48                       Friendster 46
Bang & Olufsen 8, 75-76, 79           gestalt 17-21, 39
blur 20-21                            GM 25
BMW 18                                Google iv, 7-8, 26, 34, 47, 59, 80, 84, 91-92, 94
brain 35                              Heinz 28
Braun 18, 40                          integrated circuit 3
Bush, George W. 37                    IDEO 36
Cartier 70                            Ikea 49, 63
chef’s menu 77                        Illich, Ivan 99, xi
Coca-Cola 29                          iPod iv, 4, 18-21, 25-26, 46, 63, 66-67, 95
      JOHN MAEDA - THE LAWS OF SIMPLICITY



Ive, Jonathan 41          Pollock, Jackson 51
konjo 77                  progress bar 27-28, 30, 59-60, 97
lean back 75-76, 79       Ragnetti, Andrea iv
Lenovo 5                  Rand, Paul 38
Lego ii, 49               Razr 6
LinkedIn 46               relate-translate-surprise 39-41
Linux 93-94               Reeves, Keanu 90
live.com 7                ROE 71
Loewy, Raymond 29         ROF 83
Maserati 75               she 2, 9, 24, 31, 66-67, 85
McDonald’s 24             Salesforce.com 92
Media Lab ii, viii, 96    Saturday Night Live 31
Microsoft 7, 93           Shyamalan, M. Night 41
Miyazaki, Hayao 68        slip 13-15
Modernism 49, 63-64, 68   Studio65 41
Monet 20                  sushi 58, 76-78
Mori, Hiroaki 49          Survivor 35
Motorola 6                Tamagocchi 68
MSN 73                    Tanaka, Ikko 48-49
Mueck, Ron 70             TED iv
Negroponte, Nicholas 53   ThinkPad 5
Neopets 68                Toyota 25, x
Nourse, Mike 37           Treo 67
O’Keeffe, Georgia 20      undo 78-81, 87, 99
omakase 76-68             USPS 30
open source 93-94         Weingart, Wolfgang 36
Paradiso, Joseph 96       Whole Foods Market 31
Philips iv                Xerox 39
Pogue, David iv           Yahoo! 73
                   YOU’RE STILL HERE?



february 2, 2005


I used to see an older fellow at the MIT pool almost every day.
He was, he told me, a retired professor of linguistics.
     Today I saw him in the locker room after a long hiatus,
and we had a brief conversation about “insecurity,” a topic
that I’d been thinking about.
     “The thing with insecurity, is that if you are too insecure,
then you don’t grow—because you’re paralyzed by the fear of
failure,” I said to him, out of the blue. “On the other hand,
if you have no insecurity, then you don’t grow either—because
your head is so big that you can't recognize your failures.”
     “Balance in all,” the professor emeritus replied.
     Then I posited, “If you are in the middle, however, you
have to shift towards the edges and oscillate a bit in order to
know if you are centered.”
     “You can get lost in the middle sometimes,” he said.
     We both fell quiet and I finished packing my things.
Then, I was tying my shoes when I blurted, “Mentors.”
     The professor emeritus said in a firm voice, “You need
mentors to give you courage.”
     I then sorrowfully parried, “But all your mentors tend to
go away as you age.”
     The professor emeritus paused, and then responded,
“Yes,
 “Yes,because
       becauseyou
               youdon’t
                   don’tneed
                         needthem
                              themanymore.”
                                   anymore.”
     I shook his hand and said, “Thank you for the lesson.”
The Master professor smiled as he put his socks and shoes on,
and I left the locker room thinking, “Exercise is truly good
for the heart.”
