

=== ENTRY: Aesthetic-Usability Effect (pp 11-11) ===

Aesthetic designs are perceived as easier lo use than
less-aeslhetic designs. I
The aesthetic-usability effect describes a phenomenon in which people perceive
more~aesthetic designs as easier to use than less-aesthetic designs-whether they
are or not. The effect has been observed in several experiments, and has significant
implications regarding the acceptance, use, and performance of a design.2
Aesthetic designs look easier to use and have a higher probability of being used,
whether or not they actually are easier to use. More usable but less-aesthetic
designs may suffer a lack of acceptance that renders issues of usability moot.
These perceptions bias subsequent interactions and are resistant to change. For
example, in a study of how people use computers, researchers found that early
impressions influenced long-term attitudes about their quality and use. A similar
phenomenon is weU documented with regard to human attractiveness~f irst
impressions of people influence attitude formation and measurably affect how
people are perceived and treated.l
Aesthetics play an important role in the way a design is used. Aesthetic designs
are more effective at fostering positive attitudes than unaesthetic designs, and
make people more tolerant of design problems. For example, it is common for
people to name and develop feelings toward designs that have fostered positive
attitudes (e.g., naming a car), and rare for people to do the same with designs that
have fostered negative attitudes. Such personal and positive relationships with a
design evoke feelings of affection, loyalty, and patience- all significant factors in
the long-term usability and overall success of a design. These rx>Sitive relation-
ships have implications for how effectively people interact with designs. Positive
relationships with a design result in an interaction that helps catalyze creative
thinking and problem solving. Negative relationships result in an interaction that
narrows thinking and stifles creativity, This is especially important in stressful envi-
ronments, since stress increases fatigue and reduces cognitive performance. ~
Always aspire to create aesthetic designs. Aesthetic designs are perceived as
easier to use, are more readily accepted and used over time, and promote creative
thinking and problem solving. Aesthetic designs also foster positive relationships
with people, making them more tolerant of problems with a design.
See also Attractiveness Bias, Form Follows Function, Golden Ratio,
law of Pragnanz, Ockham's Razor, and Rule of Thirds.
18 Umvf'(<;al Prinnplc.<; of DeSign
I Note that the authors use the term aesthetic-
usability effect lor convenient reference. It
does not appear in the seminal work or subse-
quent research.
~ The seminal work on the aesthetic-usability
effect is ~Apparent Usability vs. Inherent
Usability: Experimental Analysis on the
Determinants of the Apparent Usabilityn by
Masaaki Kurosu and KaOfi Kashimura, CHI '95
CDnference Companion, 1995, p. 292-293.
\ "Forming Impressions of Personality" by
Solomon E. Asch, Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 1946, vol. 41, 258--290.
• "Emotion & Design: Attractive Things Work
Better" by Donald Norman. WVIW.jnd.org, 2002.
Nokia was one of the first companies
to realize that adoption of cellular
phones reqUired more lhan baSiC
communication features. Cellular
phones need to be recharged
frequently, carried around, and often
suffer from signal loss or Interference;
they are not trouble-free devices.
Aesthetic elements like color covers
and custornrzable rings are more
than ornaments; the aesthetic
elements create a positive relationship
with users that. In turn, rnake such
troubles more tolerable and the
devices more successful.
While VCR's around lhe world
contlnue flashing 12:00 because
users cannot ligul'e out tile POOl"!Y
designed time and recording
controls, TiVo is setting a new bar
for recording conveOlence and
usability. TiVo's intethgent and
automated recording features,
simple navigation through
attractive on-screen menus, and
pleasant and distinct auditory
feedback are changing tile way
people record and watch tlleir
favorite programs.
Aesthel!C-UsabIIlIV Ellecl 19


=== ENTRY: Affordance (pp 12-12) ===

A property in which the physical characteristics of an
object or environment Influence its fUllction.
Objects and environments are better suited for some functions than others. Round
wheels are better suited than square wheels for rolling; therefore, round wheels are
said to better afford rolling. Stairs are better suited than fences for climbing; there·
fore, stairs are said to better afford climbing. This is not to say that square wheels
cannot be rolled or fences climbed. rather that the physical characteristics of round
wheels and fences influence the way they function and are likely to be used,l
When the affordance of an object or environment corresponds with its intended
function, the design will perform more efficiently and will be easier to use.
Conversely, when the affordance of an object or environment confiicts with its
intended function, the design will perform less efficiently and be more difficult to
use. For example, a door with a handle affords pulling. Sometimes, doors with
handles are designed to open only by pushing-
the affordance of the handle
conflicts with the door's function. Replace the handle with a flat plate, and it now
affords pushing- the affordance of the flat plate corresponds to the way in which
the door can be used. The design is improved.
Images of common physical objects and environments can enhance the usability
of a design. For example, a drawing of a three-dimensional button on a computer
screen leverages our knowledge of the physical characteristics of buttons and,
therefore, appears to afford pressing. The popular "desktop" metaphor used by
com puler operating systems is based on this idea~images of common items like
trash cans and folders leverage our knowledge of how those items function in the
real world and, thus, suggest their function in the software environment.?
Whenever possible, you should design objects and environments to afford their
intended function, and negatively afford improper use. For example, stackable
chairs should only stack one way. Mimic familiar objects and environments in
abstract contexts (e.g., software interfaces) to imply the way in which new systems
can be used. When affordances are successfully employed in a design, it will
seem inconceivable that the design could function or be used otherwise.
See also Constraint, Mapping, Mimicry, and Wayfinding.
20 Universal Prlflrlples 01 DeSign
1 The seminal work on affOfdances is ~ Thc
Theory 01 Alfordances" by James Gibson,
In Perceiving, Acting, and J(llowing by R. E.
Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds), Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1977; and The Ecological
Approach /0 Visual Perception by James
Gibson, Houghton MiIIlin. 19"/9, A popular
treatment 01 affordances can be found in
The Design of E..",uay Th,ngs by Donak!
Norman. Doubleday, 1990.
Note that the term affordance refers 10 Ihe
properties of a physical obtocl or environment
only. When Images 01 physical ootects Of erJVt.
rooments are used (e.g .• Image 01 a button),
the images. themselves, do nol afford any-
thing. The knowledge of button alfordances
exists in the mind of the perceiver based on
experience with p/lysical buttons-ILlS not
a property of lhe image. Therefore. the
affardance is said to be perceived. See,
for example, "Atfordances and Design" by
Donald Norman, .........vw.jnd.arg.
Outdoor lighting structures often afford
landing and perching for birds. Where
birds perch, birds poop. ThiS anti
pelcl1 fixl"re IS deSigned to atwch 10
such structures and reduce the perch-
Ing affordance.
Door affordances frequenlly conflrct.
as shown in the door on the teft. Tile
"push" affordance of tile door IS know·
able only becau<;e of the sign, whlcl1
confhcls Wl!h the powerful '·pull'· affor
dance of the handle. By replaCIng the
handle wrth a flat plate. the conflict IS
eluninated and the sign is superfluous.
o
With opposing male and female
surfaces and featurt.~I~ss sides.
Leges natllraUy afford pluggmg Inlo
one another
o
OXO I; well known for ttle handle
designs of Ihelr products; shape, color,
anti texture combine to create II re-
sistible gripping aHordances.
The recessed lootpla!es and
handlebar Orlentaflon of the
Segway Human TranslXlrter
afford one mounting position
for the user - the correct one.
Allorr:lance 21


=== ENTRY: Alignment (pp 13-13) ===

The placeillent of eleillents such lhal edges line up along
cOllllllon rows or columns, or their bodies along a COIll-
Illon center.
Elements in a design should be aligned with one or more other elements. This
creates a sense of unity and cohesion, which contributes to the design's overall
aesthetic and perceived stability. Alignment can also be a powerful means of leading
a person through a design. For example. the rows and columns of a grid or table
can be used to make explicit the relatedness of elements sharing those rows and
columns, and to lead the eyes left-to-right and top-ta-bottom accordingly. Edges of
the design medium (e.g., edge of a page or screen) and the natural positions on the
design medium (e.g., centerlines) should also be considered alignment elements.
In paragraph text, left-aligned and right-aligned text blocks provide more powerful
alignment cues than do center-aligned text blocks. The invisible column created
by left-aligned and right·aligned text blocks presents a clear, visual cue against
which other elements of the design can be aligned. Center-aligned text blocks,
conversely, provide more visually ambiguous alignment cues, and can be difficult
to connect with other elements. Justified text provides more alignment cues than
unjustified text, and should be used in complex compositions with many elements.
Although alignment is generally defined in terms of rows and columns, more com·
plex forms of alignment exist. In aligning elements along diagonals, for example,
the relative angles between the invisible alignment paths should be 30 degrees or
greater because separation of less than 30 degrees is too subtle and difficult to
detect. I In spiral or circular alignments, it may be necessary to augment or highlight
the alignment paths so that the alignment is perceptible; otherwise the elements may
not seem to be placed according to any particular pattern. As with all such principles
of this type, there are exceptions (e.g., the misalignment of elements to attract
attention or create tension). However, these exceptions are rare, and alignment
should be considered the general rule.
For most designs, align elements into rows and columns or along a centerline.
When elements are not arranged in a row/column format, consider highlighting the
alignment paths. Use left· or righHustified text to create the best alignment cues,
and consider justified text for complex compositions.
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect and Good Continuation.
22 Universal Prinnples 01 Design
I Sec, for example, Elements of Graph Design by
Stephen M. Kosslyn, W. H. Freeman and
Company, 1994, p. 172.
UEClORS
fOR PUSIIiENT
...
VICE PAUIIiENT
(REPliBUCAN)
,- -.
.- -.
I
I
,- -.
-
-II
I I
,,-
,,-
(REfORM)
PAT BUCHANAN '".SIOIKI
EZOlAfOSTEA. __
\Sm:lAusn
OAVIO McREYNOlOS , ~_""
MARY CAL HOLUS ....... ..uKItI
I I
HOWARO PHILLIPS · ' IlI1lOVIl
J, CURTIS fRAZIER ''IICl Plll"fl(H'
(WORKERS WORLD)
MONICA MOOREHEAD , ,.._II!
GLORIA La RIIIA·_l'llllllVfl
WRITE·IN CANOIOATE
10_" owrlla-ioc • ..w.r. ........
"'OCI ................. .,,.... .........
I TURN PAGE TO CONTINU! VOTING>
ElECTORS
fOft",UIII£NT
...
VICE "'(SIUM
lA_hII lhI • .-.... ...
•• ...a!rb •• _Ior_ ..
IOf:I.I
1V<oI.r.'""",1
I TURN PAGE TO CONnNlJE VOnNG >


=== ENTRY: Archetypes (pp 14-14) ===

Universal patterns of theme and form resulting from innate
biases or dispositions.
Archetypes are found in the themes of myths (e.g., death and rebirth), characters
in literature (e.g., hero and villain), and imagery in dreams (e.g., eyes and teeth).
They are believed to be a product of unconscious biases and dispositions that have
been "hardwired" in the brain over the course of human evolution. Since these
innate biases and dispositions are unconscious, their existence is inferred when
common patterns emerge in many cultures over long periods. Identifying and align~
ing appropriate archetypes with a design will increase its probability of success.'
Harley-Davidson aligns its product design and branding with the outlaw archetype,
emphasizing freedom and living outside the rules of society. Prooucts have a cer-
tain look and feel (e.g., black and chrome motorcycles with a loud, distinctive
sound) and marketing images emphasize rugged looking people in black leather.
Nike (named after the Greek goddess of victOlY), by contrast, aligns its brand with
the Hero archetype, using heroic sports figures to promote its product. Michael
Jordan, Tiger Woods, and Lance Armstrong are all shawn wearing Nike products
while typically striking a heroic pose. This does not mean that a picture of Michael
Jordan on a Harley wouldn't help sell motorcycles, or that a picture of a group of
outlaws wearing Nike leather jackets wouldn't help sell sportswear. It does mean
that the probability of success would be lower because the archetypes do nat align
with the design.2
In storytelling, archetypal themes are all too familiar. For example, one archetypal
plot-the Hero's Journey-can be summarized as follows: a prospective hero is
called to an adventure that he or she refuses; a meeting with a mentor occurs and
the hero meets the call; the hero experiences various trials, often including the
defeat or death of the mentor by an ultimate enemy; the hera must overcome self-
doubt and confront the ultimate enemy; the hero defeats the ultimate enemy and
returns home to great celebration. This archetypal theme has been successfully
employed by filmmakers like George Lucas and George Miller, and is also evident
in the works of Steven Spielberg, John Boorman, Francis Coppola, and a number
of Disney animated films >~
Consider archetypal themes and farms in all aspects of a design-from form and
function to name and brand. Since archetypes influence perception on an uncon-
scious and primarily affective level, they are especially useful when traditional
modes of communication (e.g., language) cannot be used. Note that reactions to
specific archetypes may vary across cultures and, therefore, should be tested on
target populations prior to use.
See also Affordance, Mimicry, and Threat Detection.
24 Uniliersal PllnClples of DeSign
1 The seminal work on archetypes is "'The
Archetypes and the Collective Unconsciou~"
by Carl G. Jung, In the Collected Works of C.
G. Jung, Vol. 9 Part 1 (translated by R. F. C.
Hull), Princeton UniverSity Press, 1981.
I See The Hero and the Outlaw: Building
Extraordinary Brands through the Power of
Archetypes by Margaret Mark and Carol S.
Pearson, McGraw-Hili Trade, 2001.
J The seminal work on archetypes In storytelling
is The Hero with a Thousand Faces by Joseph
Campbell, Princeton University Press, 1960.
These are profX)Sed designs for a
marker system 10 warn future genera-
liol1S of tile presence of a nuclear·
waste disposal site. The df!sign specifi·
calion requlled the markers to stand
for the life of the radroactlve hazard
(10,000 years). clearly warn people to
stay away Irom the <)lea, and assume
that future Civilizations will I lot be
knowledgeable of radioactive haZ31ds
or speal( any language known today
The deSigns address this seemingly
Impossible specification through the
bl illl(lnl applicatioll of arc!letypal
theme and forrn- parched earth,
snakelike eanhworks, and claws and
tl1Dr ns· to warn future humans
of the radioactive hazards on an
alfectlve, instinctive level
Archetypes 25


=== ENTRY: Attractiveness Bias (pp 15-15) ===

A tendency to see attractive people as more intelligent,
competent, moral, and sociable tllan unattractive people.'
Attractive people are generally perceived more positively than unattractive people.
They receive more attention from the opposite sex, receive more affection from
their mothers, receive more leniency from judges and juries, and receive more
votes from the electorate than do unattractive people. All other variables being
equal, attractive people are preferred in hiring decisions, and will make more
money doing the same work than unattractive people. The attractiveness bias is
a function of both biological and environmental factors!
Biologically speaking, people are attractive when they exude health and fertility.
Good biological measures for health and fertility are average and symmetrical
facial features, and a waist-ta-hip ratio in the ideal range (0.70 for women, 0.90 for
men). An absence of these features is thought to be an indicator of malnutrition,
disease, or bad genes; none of which are preferable attributes for a potential mate.
Biological factors of attraction are innate and true across cultures. For example, in
stUdies presenting images of attractive and unattractive people to babies (two-
months-old and six-months-old), the babies looked longer at the attractive people
regardless of their gender, age, or race.]
Environmentally speaking, men are attracted to women when they exaggerate
socially acknowledged features of sexuality (e.g., lipstick to exaggerate lips); and
women are attracted to men when they appear to possess wealth and power (e.g.,
expensive automobiles). For example, in studies presenting images of attractive
and unattractive people to men and women, along with descriptions of their occu-
pations, women preferred unattractive men with high-paying occupations equally
to attractive men with medium-paying occupations. However, men never preferred
unattractive women regardless of their financial status. Environmental factors of
attraction vary considerably across cultures.4
Consider the attractiveness bias in design contexts involving images of people,
such as marketing and advertising. When the presentation of attractive women is a
key element of a design, use renderings or images of women with waist-to-hip
ratios of approximately 0.70, accented by culturally appropriate augmentations of
sexual features. When the presentation of attractive men is a key element of a
design, use renderings or images of men with waist-to-hip ratios of approximately
0.90, and visible indicators of wealth or status (e.g., expensive clothing).
See also Baby-Face Bias, Most Average Facial Appearance Effect,
and Waist-to-Hip Ratio.
26 Universal PrinCiples of Desfgn
I Also known as look-ism.
7 The seminal work on the attractiveness bias is
"What Is Beautiful Is Good" by Karen Dian,
Ellen Berscheid, and Elaine Walster, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, vol.
24(3), p. 285-290. A nice contemporary
(€Mew or the attractiveness bias research is
~Maxfms or Myths of Beauty? A Meta-analytic
and TheoreUcal Review~ by Judilh H. Langlois,
et aL. Psychological Bulfe/tn, 2000. vol.
126(31. p. 390-423.
.I See, for example. ~Baby BeauUful: Adult
Attributions of Infant Competence as a
Function of Infant Attractlveness
N by Cookie
W. Stephan and Judith H. langlois, Child
Development, 1984, vol. 55. p. 576-585.
• Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty
by Nancy Etcoff, Anchor Books. 20c0.
Tile first presidential debale between
Richard Nixon and Robert Kennedy
(l960) is a classic demonstration of
tile attractiveness bias. Nixon was ill
and running a fever. He wore light
colors and no makeup, further whlten-
ing his already pale complexion and
contrasting hiS five·o'clock sl1adow.
Kennedy wore dark colors, makeup,
and practiced his delivelY in a studio
pnor to the debate. People WilD lis-
(ened to the debate by radio believed
Nixon to be the winner. However.
people WllO watched tlle debate on TV
carne to a very different conclusion.
-
Atlrarlivcness Bias 27


=== ENTRY: Baby-Face Bias (pp 16-16) ===

A tendency to see people and things with baby-faced fea-
tures as more naNe, helpless, and honest than those with
mature features.
People and things with round features, large eyes, small noses, high foreheads,
short chins, and relatively lighter skin and hair are perceived as babylike and, as a
result, as having babylike personality attributes, naivete, helplessness, honesty,
and innocence. The bias is found across all age ranges, cultures, and many mam-
malian species,l
The degree to which people are influenced by the baby· face bias is evident in how
babies are treated by adults. For example, babies with weak baby-face features
receive less positive attention from adults and are rated as less likable. less attrac-
tive, and less fun to be with than babies with strong baby-face features. Large,
round heads and eyes appear to be the strongest of the facial cues contributing to
this bias. For example, premature babies often lack these key baby-face features
(e.g., their eyes are closed, and their heads are less round) and are rated by
adults as less desirable to care for or be around. A potentially related phenomenon
is the rate of child abuse for premature babies, which is approximately 300
percent greater than for normal-term babies."
Baby-faced adults are subject to a similar bias. However, unlike with children,
there are liabilities to being a baby-faced adult. Baby-faced adults appearing in
commercials are effective when their role involves innocence and honesty, such
as a personal testimonial for a product, but ineffective when their role involves
speaking authoritatively about a topic, such as a doctor asserting the benefit of a
product. Baby-faced adults are perceived as simple and naTve, and have difficulty
being taken seriously in situations where expertise or confrontation is required. In
legal proceedings, baby-faced adults are more likely to be found innocent when
the alleged crime involves an intentional act, but are more likely to be found guilty
when the alleged crime involves a negligent act. It is apparently more believable
that a baby-faced person would do wrong accidentally than purposefully.
Interestingly, when a baby-faced defendant pleads guilty, they receive harsher
sentences than mature-faced defendants-it seems the contrast between the
expectation of innocence and the conclusion of guilt evokes a harsher reaction
than when the expectation and the conclusion align.
Consider the baby-face bias in the design of characters or products when facial
attributes are prominent (e.g., cartoon characters for children), Characters of this
type can be made more appealing by exaggerating the various neonatal features
(e.g., larger, rounder eyes). In marketing and advertising, use mature-faced people
when conveying expertise and authority; use baby-faced people when conveying
testimonial information and submissiveness.
See also Attractiveness Bias, Mimicry, and Savanna Preference.
28 UnIversal PrinCiples of Design
I The seminal worK on the baby-face bias Is
"Ganzheit und Tei! in der ticrischen und men-
schlichen Gemecnschaft- I Part and Parcel In
Animal and Human Societies] by Konrad
lorenz. Studium Gcnerale. 1950. vol. 3(9).
~ See Reading Faces: Window to the Soul by
leslie A. Zebrowltz. Westview Press. 1998
There are many other factors that could
account lor this statislIC. For example. Ihe
level 01 care and frequency of crying in pre·
malure babies is significanUy higher than for
normal-term babies. which CQuld contribute
to the stress of the caregiver.
onnnn(c)(cJ
I
I hl
-,-e
..
~
'\
Baby-face chmacterlstlcs Include
rollnd features. large eyes, 5111all
noses. 11igl1 foreheads, and silort
chins. Supellleonatal and super-
mature features are usually only found
In caltoon characters and mythiC
creatures. Baby-face fealules correlate
wiU, perceptions 01 helplessness and
innocence. whereas mature features
correlate with perceptions of knowl-
edge and authanty.
Baby·Face Bias 29


=== ENTRY: Chunking (pp 17-17) ===

A technique of combining many units of information into a
limited number of units or chunks, so that the information
is easier to process and remember.
The term chunk refers to a unit of information in short-term memory-a string of
letters, a word, or a series of numbers. The technique of chunking seeks to
accommodate short~term memory limits by formatting information into a small
number of units. The maximum number of chunks that can be efficiently
processed by short-term memory is four, plus or minus one. For example, most
people can remember a list of five words for 30 seconds, but few can remember a
list of ten words for 30 seconds. By breaking the list of ten words into multiple,
smaller chunks (e.g., two groups of three words, and one group of four words),
recall performance is essentially equivalent to the single list of five words,l
Chunking is often applied as a general technique to simplify designs-a potential
misapplication of the principle. The limits specified by this principle deal specifically
with tasks involving memory. For example, it is unnecessary and counterproductive
to restrict the number of dictionary entries on a page to four or five. Reference-
related tasks consist primarily of scanning for a particular item; chunking in this
case would dramatically increase the scan time and effort, and yield no benefits.
Chunk information when people are required to recall and retain information, or
when information is used for problem solving. Do not chunk information that is to
be searched or scanned. In environments where noise or stress can interfere with
concentration, consider chunking critical display information in anticipation of
diminished short-term memory capacity. Use the contemporary estimate of four,
plus or minus one chunks when applying this technique.2
See also Errors. Mnemonic Device, Performance Load, and Signal-ta-Noise Ratio.
I The semina! work on shari-term memory limits
is "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus
Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for
Processing Information" by George Miller, The
Psychological Review, 1956, vol. 63, p. 81-97.
As made evident by the tille of Miller's paper,
his original estimate for short-term memory
capacity was 7 ± 2 chunks.
, A readable contemporary reference is Human
Memory; Theory and Practice by Alan
Baddeley, Allyn & Bacon, 1997. Regarding
short-term memory limits, see. for example,
"The Magical Number Four in Short-Term
Memory: A Reconsideration of Mental Storage
Capacjty~ by Nelson Cowan, Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 2001, vol. 24, p. 87-114.
List 1
angry
hoarse
snuggle
search
fatigue
stutter
scorch
warning
teenager
anxious
This e-learnlng .course by EduNeenng
makes excellent use of chunkmg. Note
thai Ule number or conlent topics (left
gray panel) observes the appropriate
limits, as do the infonnallon chunks on
the topics themselves. Overview and
Challenge are nol counted because they
contain organizing information and
qui2Zes only.
List 2
thrunced
rooped
croodle
poosk
quanked
maffle
brizzle
gardyloo
haspenald
cark
Familiar words are easier to remember
and chunk together than unfamiliar
words. or the two lists, list l IS easier
to recall.
292635732
292-63-5732
7045556791
(704) 555-6791
Large strings of numbers are difficult to
recall. Cl1unking large strings of numbers
Inlo mul1iple, smaller strings can Ilelp.
Most people can remember their Soc,al
Security number and frequently cailed
phone numbers.
EDUl:JEERING
"""""
.
'"""
"'"
COM_ion PIog!,"",
P,01edion
H"1IIh No; .. Arus
Ch.H.ng.
Cnmm .. nts
E.dt
What creates sound ?
.......... "." ..
_.,
Amplitlld. " !lie lire. of.
llibr;lbon (or hetQht ofaS<Uld
wrn) ""d If mtilM"td in deabtII:
(dB) For ..... ...,. onc·OttMI
""' .. ,.... tIottc " 1"O\IiN)"20 II>
lO'Mt .. uun 111 prKt..-ed
\c.udoUI Tht IMmo:i ur till!
dt:1"'lam......"I'OOC~~'"
... ......t 5 <18. Mel t<Ql(\s '" 135
dB , .. ,MIA PMI Htama
prl>~ " rttl>lTlllmded whota
JOU.~ c","O.e410,1IUfIdJ ot85
dBoriJ'".oU1"
FnqucnrYll1be number ot
,,,,,,,dw"Yn"I~_of
tune WId .. measured II bert:
(JJ.t) One hM:t. equals «Ie .0IIIId
wave per .teOlld. The hlllllll ear
i, bert ~dilpled 10 bearrnoddle·
frequency 'OI.Olds. about 20 to
20.000 R.t
H"Wo·frequcmy , (>II(1d WIVe.
m.>ke biih-pitched .ounds. while
low-li"equenc,.o\1lld WIVU mW
low-pitched lounds Moddle-
ITcqu.DC"ouD<b III"'" human
ht-...a ran&e seem Iwder than
.oond. oI"lvjber Of kowef fHlch.
3 "
.. __ ... -
Relating amplitude and frequency
TI> learn mote.hour "'" relAhonabop berweel> ~
tnd li"eque"",y, ezpenmenl WIth the .etIInp bolow P,e"
~pt.y builOII11> lee ..... hearlht"rub..
How much have you leamed?
1'ra<;1Jc:. your knl>wledie by tomplellnj tile .dMty below
I
,
f
I
I l' ,
•
I
'
')
/
CIHlnkulg 31


=== ENTRY: Closure (pp 18-18) ===

A tendency to perceive a set of individual elements as a
single, recognizable pattem, rather than multiple, individ-
ual elements.
The principle of closure is one of a number of principles referred to as Gestalt
principles of perception. It states that whenever possible, people tend to perceive a
set of individual elements as a single, recognizable pattern, rather than multiple,
individual elements. The tendency to perceive a single pattern is so strong that
people will close gaps and fill in missing information to complete the pattern if
necessary. For example, when individual line segments are positioned along a
circular path, they are first perceived holistically as a circle, and then as compris-
ing multiple, independent elements. The tendency to perceive information in this
way is automatic and subconscious; it is likely a function of an innate preference
for simplicity over complexity, and pattern over randomness. 1
Closure is strongest when elements approximate simple, recognizable patterns,
such as geometric forms, and are 1000ted near one another. When simple, recog·
nizable patterns are not easily perceived, designers can create closure through
transitional elements (Le., subtle visual cues that help direct the eye to find the
pattern). Generally, if the energy required to find or form a pattern is greater than
the energy required to perceive the elements individually, closure will not occur.
The principle of closure enables deSigners to reduce complexity by using a smaller
number of elements needed to organize and communicate information. For exam·
pie, a logo design that is composed of recognizable elements does not need to
complete many of its lines and contours to be clear and effective. Reducing the
number of lines in the logo not only reduces its complexity, but it makes the logo
more interesting to look at because viewers subconsciously participate in the com·
pletion of its design. Many forms of storytelling leverage closure in a similar way.
For example, in comic books, the illustrator presents discrete scenes to the reader,
who then supplies what happens in between. The storyline is a unique combination
of information provided by the storyteller, and information provided by the reader.2
Use closure to reduce the complexity and increase the interestingness of designs.
When designs involve simple and recognizable patterns, consider removing or
minimizing the elements of a design that can then be supplied by viewers. When
designs involve more complex patterns, consider tile use of transitional elements
to assist viewers in finding or forming the pattern.
See also Gcxxi Continuation, Law of Pragnanz, and Proximity.
34 UflIversal PrinCIples of DeSign
I The seminal work on closure is
"Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt,
II" [laws of Organization in Perceptual Formsl
by Max Wertheimer, PsychoJogische
Forschung. 1923. vol. 4, p. 301-350, reprinted
in A Source Book of Geslil/( Psychology by
Willis O. Ellis (edJ, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
1999. p. 71-88.
l See, for example, Understandmg Comics: The
Invisible Art by Scott McCloud, Kitchen Sink
Press, 1993.
.-.
• •
•
•
•
• •
••••
~ .. . '
, .
.'
I , -,
;
( \
The elements are perceived !1ollstlCillly
as a single pattern first (circle), and
Ulcn as individual elements.
Elements In text and graphics can be
minimized to allow viewers to partJci·
pate In the completion of the pattern.
Tile lesultlS a more Interesting deSign.
PtNGUIN
ICE
Series Images are undelstoocl as
representing motion because people
supply the Information in between
tile Images.
Closure 35


=== ENTRY: Cognitive Dissonance (pp 19-19) ===

A tendency to seek consistency among attitudes, lhougllts,
and beliefs.
People strive to have consistency among their attitudes, thoughts, and beliefs.
Cognitive dissonance is the state of mental discomfort that occurs when a person's
attitudes, thoughts, or beliefs (Le" cognitions) conflict. If two cognitions agree with
one another, there is consonance, and a state of comfort results. If two cognitions
disagree with one another, there is dissonance, and a state of discomfort results. I
People alleviate cognitive dissonance in one of three ways, by reducing the
importance of dissonant cognitions, adding consonant cognitions, or removing or
changing dissonant cognitions. For example, advertising campaigns that urge
peop", to show how much you care by buying diamonds seek to create cognitive
dIssonance 1n consumers-i.e., dissonance between the love that people have
for others, and the pressure to prove that love by buying diamonds. In order to
alleviate the dissonance, people can reduce the importance of the dissonant
cognition (e.g., a diamond is, after all, just a bunch of pressed carben), add
consonant cognitions (e.g., recognize that the advertising campaign is trying to
manipulate them using cognitive dissonance), or remove or change dissonant
cognitions (e.g., show how much you care by doing something else or, of course,
buying the diamonds).
When a situation involves incentives, it is interesting to note that incentives of
different sizes yield different results. When incentives for an unpleasant task are
small, people reduce dissonance by changing the dissonant cognition (e.g., "it is
okay to perform this task because I like it"). When incentives for an unpleasant
task are large, people reduce dissonance by adding a consonant cognition (e.g.,
"it is okay to perform this task because I am paid well"). When incentives are
small, people are inclined to change the way the way they feel abeut what they are
doing to alleviate dissonance. When incentives increase, people retain their original
beliefs and alleviate dissonance by justifying their participation with their compen-
sation. A small incentive is usually required to get a person to consider an
unpleasant thought or engage in an unpleasant activity. Any incentive beyond
this small incentive reduces, not increases, the probability of changing attitudes
and beliefs-this critical point is known as the point of minimum justification.'
Consider cognitive dissonance in the design of advertising and marketing
campaigns, or any other context where influence and persuasion is key. Use
consonant and dissonant information when attempting to change beliefs. Engage
people to invest their time, attention, and participation to create dissonant cogni-
tions, and then provide simple and immediate mechanisms to alleviate the
dissonance. When using compensation to reinforce change, use the minimal
compensation possible to achieve change.
See also Consistency, Cost-Benefit, and Hierarchy of Needs.
36 Universal Pflnl:lplcs 01 Design
I The seminal work on cognitive dissonance is
A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance by Leon
Festinger. Row. Perterson & Company, 1957.
A comprehensive review of the theory Is
Cognitive Dissonance: Progress Ofl a Pivotal
Theory in Social Psychology edited by Eddie
Harmon-Jones and Judson Mills. American
Psychologk:al Assoc~tlon. 1999.
• See, for example, ~Cognitive Consequences of
Forced Compliance" by Leon Festinger and
James Car1smlth. Journal of Abnorrnal and
SOda/F>¥c~, 1959,';.58. p. 203-210.
Point of Mmimum Justification
BehaVior
Attitude
Incentive
Tile point of mimmul11 jus/iflcation
represents the optimal level of Inc;cn-
tive requiled to change behaVior and
attitude. Incentives exceeding Il1ls
level will conlinue to change behaVior.
but Will tall to c/lange attitude
Perhaps the most successful use of
cognitive dissonance In the histOIY
of advertiSing IS the AOL free-hours
campaign delivered on CD-ROM. The
Incentive to try AOL IS prOVided In tile
form of a (ree Inal pellod. People who
try the selvlce go througl1 a set-up
process, where they define unique
e-mail addresses, screen names, and
passwords, investing time and energy
to get it all to wolk. The greater tile
lime and energy Invested dunng t111S
trial period, 11 18 greater the cognitive
dissonance at the lime of expiratIon.
SUlce the compensation to engage
In this activity was minimal. the
wdy most peeple alleViate the dlssc-
nance IS to hdve JXlSitive feelings
about the service
whlcll leads
to paid sllbscriptlons.
COlo1l11hvc OiSSOIli:1nce 37


=== ENTRY: Color (pp 20-20) ===

Color is used in design to attract attention, group ele-
lTlents, indicate lTleaning, and enhance aesthetics.
Color can make designs more visually interesting and aesthetic, and can reinforce
the organization and meaning of elements in a design. If applied improperly, colors
can seriously harm the form and function of a design. The following guidelines
address common issues regarding the use of color.!
Number of Colors
Use color conservatively. Limit the palette to what the eye can process at one
glance (about five colors depending on the complexity of the design). Do not use
color as the only means to impart information since a significant portion of the
population has limited color vision.
Color Combinations
Achieve aesthetic color combinations by using adjacent colors on the color wheel
(analogous), opposing colors on the color wheel (complementary), colors at the
corners of a symmetrical polygon circumscribed in the color wheel (triadic and
quadratic), or color combinations found in nature. Use warmer colors for fore-
ground elements, and cooler colors for background elements. Light gray is a safe
color to use for grouping elements without competing with other colors.
Saturation
Use saturated colors (pure hues) when attracting attention is the priority. Use
desaturated colors when performance and efficiency are the priority. Generally,
desaturated, bright colors are perceived as friendly and professional; desaturated,
dark colors are perceived as serious and professional; and saturated colors are
perceived as more exciting and dynamic. Exercise caution when combining
saturated colors, as they can visually interfere with one another and increase
eye fatigue.
Symbolism
There is no substantive evidence supporting general effects of color on emotion
or mood. Similarly, there is no universal symbolism for different colors- different
cultures attach different meanings to colors. Therefore, verify the meaning of
colors and color combinations for a particular target audience prior to use.2
See also Expectation Effect, Highlighting, Interference Effects, Similarity, and
Uniform Connectedness.
38 Ul1lVf!rsal PrinCipl es 01 lJr.sign
I A nice treatment of color theory is Interaction
of Color by Josef Albers, Yale University Press,
1963. For a more applied treatment, see The
Art of Color: The Subjective Experience and
Objective Rationale of Color by Johannes Itten,
Jotln Wiley & Sons, 1997; and Human-
Computer Interaction by Jenny Preece, el aI.,
Addison Wesley, 1994.
• It is reasonable 10 assume thai dark colors will
make people sleepy, lighl colors will make
people lively, and irritating colors will make
people irritaled. Otherwise, the only observable
influence of color on behavior is its ability to
lead people to repaint walls unneces.<;arily. For
those determined to try to calm drunks and
win football games Ihrough the application of
color, see Tile Power of Color by Morton
Walker. Avery Publishing, 1991.
•••
• ••
Analogous
Example from Nature
Analogous coJor combinations use
colors that are next to each other all
the color wheel.
••
•
Complementary
Example from Nal ure
Complementary COIOf combinations
use two colors tllat are directly across
from eacll other on tile color wheel.
Hues from yellow to l·ed-vioJet on
the color wheel are warm. Hues from
violet to green-yellow are cool.
Saturation refers to the amount of gray
in a hue. As saturation increases, the
amount of gray decreases. BI·ightness
refers to the amount of white added to
a hue- as brigll tness increases, the
amount of white increases.
•••
• ••
Triadic
Example from Nature
Triadic color combinations use colors
at the comers of an equilateral triangle
circumscribed in the color wlleel.
•••• • • ••••
Quadratic
Example from Nature
Quadratic color combinations use
colors at that corners of a square or
rectangle circumscribed in the
color wheel.
+
- - ---
-
Saturation - ------ +
Color 39


=== ENTRY: Common Fate (pp 21-21) ===

Elernents that rnove in Ihe sarne direction are perceived to
be rnore relatecl than elements that rnove in clifferent
clirections or are station8ry.
The principle of common fate is one of a number of principles referred to as
Gestalt principles of perception. It asserts that elements that move together in a
common direction are perceived as a single group or chunk, and are interpreted
as being more related than elements that move al different times or in different
directions. Far example, a row of randomly arranged XS and Os that is stationary is
naturally grouped by similarity, Xs with Xs, and Os with Os. However, if certain ele-
ments in the row move in one direction, and other elements move in the opposite
direction, elements are grouped by their common motion and direction.'
Perceived relatedness is strongest when the motion of elements occurs at the
same time and velocity, and in the same direction. As any of these factors vary, the
elements are decreasingly related. One exception is when the motion exhibits an
obvious pattern or rhythm (e.g .. wave patterns), in which case the elements are
seen as related, Although common fate relationships usuaUy refer to moving ele-
ments, they are also observed with static objects that flicker (i.e., elements that
alternate between brighter and darker states), For flickering elements, perceived
relatedness is strongest when the elements flicker at the same time, frequency,
and intensity, or when a recognizable pattern or rhythm is formed.2
Common fate relationships influence whether elements are perceived as figure
or ground elements, When certain elements are in motion and others are station-
ary, the moving objects will be perceived as figure elements, and stationary ones
will be perceived as ground elements. When elements within a region move
together with the bounding edge of the region, the elements and the region will
be perceived as the figure. When elements within a region move together, but the
bounding edge of the region remains stationary or moves opposite to the elements,
the elements within the region will be perceived as the ground.)
Consider common fate as a grouping strategy when displaying information with
moving or nickering elements. Related elements should move at the same time,
velocity, and direction, or flicker at the same time, frequency, and intensity, It is
possible to group elements when these variables are dissimilar, but only if the
motion or flicker forms a recognizable pattern. When moving elements within
bounded regions, move the edges of the region in the same direction as the
elements to achieve a figure relationship or in the opposite direction as the ele~
ments to achieve a ground relationship.
See also Figure-Ground Relationship and Similarity.
40 UnlVf:'l siil Prllll"lples 01 De"lgn
1 The seminal work on common fille is
"Untersuchungen zOr Lehre von der Gestalt,
II~ [Laws of Organil.alion in Perceptual Forms]
by Max Wertheimer, Psychologische
Forschung, 1923, vol. 4, p. 301-350, reprinted
In A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology by
Willis D. ElI!s (ed'), Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1999, p. 71v88.
See, for example, "Generalized Common Fate:
Grouping by Common luminance Changes"
by Allison B, SekuJer and Patrick J. Bennett,
PsycflOlogtca/ Science. 2001, Vol. 12{6), p.
437-444.
1 "Common Fate as a Determinant of Figure-
Ground Organizalion~ by Joseph Uoyd Brooks,
Stanford·Berkeley TalK, 2000, Stanford
University, May 16, 2OCO.
OXOOXOXXXOO
o 0 X
Radar Lracklng displays use common
fate to group tracked aircraft with
key information about their identities
and beadings.
X 0 OX
XX 0
o I 10XOOXOXXXOO
t
X
o 0 o OX
0
X
XX OJ
Tile Xs and Os group by smilarity-
wilen stationary, such as Xs with Xs,
Os With as. However, when a mix of
the Xs and as move up anel down 111
a common fashion, they are grouped
primarily by common fale.
This object is being
tracked by radar.
The object and its
label are visually
grouped because they
are moving at the
same speed and in
the same direction.
Common Fate 41


=== ENTRY: Comparison (pp 22-22) ===

A method of illustrating mlationships and patterns in
system behaviors by representing two or more system
variables in a controlled way.
People understand the way the world works by identifying relationships and pat-
terns in or between systems. One of the most powerful methods of identifying and
understanding these relationships is to represent information in controlled ways so
that comparisons can be made. Key techniques for making valid comparisons are
apples to apples, single contexts, and benchmarks. I
Apples to Apples
Comparison data should be presented using common measures and common
units. For example, when comparing crime rates of different countries, it is neces-
sary to account for differences in variables such as population, types of laws, and
level of law enforcement. Otherwise, conclusions based on the comparison will be
unreliable. Common methods of ensuring apples-ta-apples comparisons include
clearly disclosing details of how variables were measured. making corrections to
the data as necessary to eliminate confounding variables, and representing the
variables using the same graphical and numerical standards.
Single Context
Comparison data should be presented in a single context, so that subtle differ-
ences and patterns in the data are detectable. For example, the ability to detect
patterns across multiple graphs is lower if the graphs are located on separate
pages versus the same page. Common methods of representing information in
single contexts include the use of a small number of displays that combine many
variables (versus many separate displays), and multiple small views of system
states (knQlNn as small multiples) in a single display (versus multiple displays).
Benchmarks
Claims about evidence or phenomena should be accompanied by benchmark
variables so that clear and substantive comparisons can be made. For example,
claims about the seriousness of the size of U.S. debt are meaningful only when
accompanied by benchmark information about U.S. gross national product (GNP);
a debt can appear serious when depicted as a quantity, but irrelevant when pre-
sented as a percentage of GNP. Common types of benchmark data include past
performance data. competitor data, or data from well-accepted industry standards.
Use comparisons to convincingly illustrate patterns and relationships. Ensure that
compared variables are apples to apples by measuring and representing variables
in common ways, correcting for confounds in the data as necessary. Use multivari-
ate displays and small multiples to present comparisons in single contexts when
possible. Use benchmarks to anchor comparisons and provide a point of refer-
ence from which to evaluate the data.
See also Garbage ln-Garbage Out, layering, and Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
42 Umvefsal PrinCiples 01 Dt:!slgrt
I See, for example, Visual Explanations,
Graphics Press, 1998: and EnvisioninB
Information, Graphics Press. 1990 both by
Edward R. Tufte.
This is a modined version of Florence
Nightingale's famous Coxcomb graplls.
The graphs are composed of twelve
wedges, each representing a month
Additionally, ""eh wedge has three
layers lepresentlng three different
causes of death. A quicK review of the
graphs reveals that the real tilreat to
British troops was nol tile RussianS,
but cholela, dysentery, and typhus.
The graphs also convincingly Illustrate
the impact of improved Iwglenic prac~
tlces at military camps and hOSPitals,
which were aggressively implemented
beginning In March 1855. The graphs
make apples-Io-apples comparisons,
representing Ule same variable
(death rates) the same way (area
of the wedge).
Tl1e graphs are rnullivanate, Integrating
a numbel of key variables so that pat-
telns and relationships In the data can
be studied within one context. Deaths
resulting from war wounds serve as a
compelling benchmark to illustrate the
Significance of disease, as does the
earlier graph rOI" the later graph. The
graphs have been corrected based on
original data published in Nightingale's
Notes on Matters Affecting the I-Iealth,
Efficiency and Hospilal Administration
of the Blitlsh Army, 1858.
Diagram of the Causes of Mortality
in the Army in the East
April 1854 to March 1855
April 1855 to March 1856
Nne
JUly
~~"
July
If1
co
~
!s.
'<
Crimea
'"
Ii'
'£ ...
"
oon
~o,,"
~
9t.
99a! uer
Death from wounds in battle
Death from other causes
Death from dis""se
-1",
<P
<f'
'"
"9-
ComparC>OIl 43


=== ENTRY: Confirmation (pp 23-23) ===

A technique for preventing unintended actions by requir-
ing verification of the actions before they are performed.'
Confirmation Is a technique used for critical actions, inputs, or commands. It provides
a means for verifying that an action or input is intentional and correct before it is
periormed. Confirmations are primarily used to prevent a class of errors called slips,
which are unintended actions. Confirmations slow task performance, and should
be reserved for use with critical or irreversible operations. When the consequences
of an action are not serious, or when actions are completely and easily reversible,
confirmations are not needed. There are two basic confirmation techniques: dialog
and two-step operation.'
Confirmation using a dialog involves establishing a verbal interaction with the
person using the system. It is most commonly represented as a dialog box on a
software display (e.g., "Are you sure you want to delete all files?"). In this method.
dialog boxes directly ask Ihe user if the acUon was intended and if they would like
to proceed. Confirmations should be used sparingly, or people will learn to ignore
them, and become frustrated at the frequent interruption. Dialog messages should
be concise but detailed enough to convey accurately the implications of the action.
The message should end with one question that is structured to be answered Yes or
No, or wilh an action verb that conveys the action to be periormed (the use of OK
and Cancel should be avoided for confirmations). For less critical confirmations that
act more as reminders, an option to disable the confirmation should be provided.
Confirmation using a two-step operation involves a preliminary step that must occur
prior to the actual command or input. This is most often used with hardware
controls, and is often referred to as an armlfire operation-first you arm the compo-
nent, and then you fire (execute) it. For example, a switch cover might have to be
lifted in order to activate a switch, two people might have to turn two unique keys in
order to launch a nuclear VoJeapon, or a control handle in a spacecraft might have
to be rotated and then pushed down in order to be activated. The purpose of the
two-step operation is to prevent accidental activation of a critical control. If the oper-
ation works only when the two-step sequence has been completed. it is unlikely
that the operation will occur accidentally. Two-step operations are commonly used
for critical operations in aircraft, nuclear power plants, and other environments
involving dangerous operations.
Use confirmations to minimize errors in the performance of critical or Irreversible
operations. Avoid overusing confirmations to ensure users do not begin to ignore
them. Use a two-step operation for hardware confirmations, and a dialog box for
software confirmations. Permit less critical confirmations to be disabled after an
initial confirmation.
See also Constraint, Errors, Forgiveness, and Garbage In-Garbage Out.
44 Universal Pnntlples or DeSign
I Also known as verification principie and
forCing function.
I See, for example, The Ocsign of Everyday
Things by Donald Norman, Doubleday, 1990;
and To Err (s Human; Building a Safer Health
System edited by Unda T. Kohn, Janet M.
Corngan, and Malia S. Donaldson, NallOflal
Academy Press. 2OXl.
- ~
Reg~
Enter a UserlD:
I
Enter a Password:
I
Re-Enter Your Password:
I
Submit
II I
Concel
unlitled
I p-
~ -
fn:rm: I Rood Rooner
, I
To:
~flCf1IaIoIuom
Cc
You have nat entered a subject. It Is re(ommended
that all menages have subjects. Would you like to
send the message anyway?
-, I
o Pon't . how thl, mauolla olloln
Common exampk5 of confirmation
strategies Include: typing in a pass-
word twice to confirm spelling:
confirming the intent of an action by
chcklng tile action button (Senti) With
an option to disable future confirma-
tions; haVing to remove a lock to open
a valve; and having to turn two unique
key~ to complete a launch CircUit.
~
I -C-an-'.-I~I II
Send
II
'N'
--------~------------~
~
COllfllmatlOn 45


=== ENTRY: Consistency (pp 24-24) ===

The usability of a system is improved when similar parts
are expressed in similar ways.
According to the principle of consistency, systems are more usable and learnable
when similar parts are expressed in similar ways. Consistency enables people to
efficiently transfer knowledge to new contexts, learn new things quickly, and focus
attention on the relevant aspects of a task. There are four kinds of consistency:
aesthetic, functional, internal, and external.!
Aesthetic consistency refers to consistency of style and appearance (e.g., a com-
pany logo that uses a consistent font, color, and graphic). Aesthetic conSistency
enhances recognition, communicates membership, and sets emotional expecta-
tions. For example, Mercedes-Benz vehicles are instantly recognizable because
the company consistently features its logo prominently on the hoc:xj or grill of its
vehicles. The logo has become associated with quality and prestige, and informs
people how they should feel about the vehicle-i.e., respected and admired.
Functional consistency refers to consistency of meaning and action (e.g., a traffic
light that shows a yellow light before going to red). Functional consistency
improves usability and leamability by enabling people to leverage existing knOWl-
edge about how the design functions. For example, videocassette recorder control
symbols, such as for rewind, play, forward, are now used on devices ranging from
slide projectors to MP3 music players. The consistent use of these symbols on
new devices enables people to leverage eXisting knowledge about how the controls
function, which makes the new devices easier to use and learn.
Internal consistency refers to consistency with other elements in the system (e.g.,
signs within a park are consistent with one another). Internal consistency cultivates
trust with people; it is an indicator that a system has been designed, and not cob-
bled together. Within any logical grouping elements should be aesthetically and
functionally consistent with one another.
External consistency refers to consistency with other elements in the environment
(e.g., emergency alarms are consistent across drtferent systems in a control room).
External consistency extends the benefrts of internal consistency across multiple,
independent systems. It is more difficult to achieve because different systems
rarely observe common design standards.
Consider aesthetic and functional consistency in all aspects of design. Use aes-
thetic consistency to establish unique identities that can be easily recognized.
Use functional consistency to simplify usability and ease of learning. Ensure that
systems are always internally consistent, and externally consistent to the greatest
degree JX)Ssible. When common design standards exist, observe them.
See also Modularity, Recognition Over Recall, and Similarity.
46 Unrversal Prlf1{:lplcs of DeSign
I Use consistent approaches when possible, but
do not compromise clarity or usability for con·
sistency. In the words of Emerson, "A foolish
consistency Is the hObgoblin of little minds ... "


=== ENTRY: Constancy (pp 25-25) ===

The tendency to perceive objects as unchanging, despite
cllanges in sensory input. I
People tend to perceive objects as constant and unchanging, despite changes in
perspective, lighting, color, or size. For example, a person viewed at a distance
produces a sma ller image on the retina than that same person up close, but the
perception of the size of the person is constant. The ability to perceive objects as
having constant properties despite variations in how they are perceived eliminates
the need to reinterpret those objects when they are perceived under different
conditions. This indicates that perception involves more than simply receiving
sensory inputs; rather, it is a process of continuously reconciling sensory inputs
with memories about the properties of things in the world. A few examples of
constancy include: 2
$;ze Constancy-The size of objects is perceived to be constant, even though a
change in dislance makes objects appear smaller or larger (e.g., a city skyline at
a great distance appears small, but the perception of the size of the buildings
remains constant).
Brightness Constancy-The brightness of objects is perceived to be constant,
even though changes in illumination make the objects appear brighter or darker
(e.g., a white shirt appears gray in a dark room, but the perception of the color of
the shirt remains constant).
Shape Conslancy-The shape of objects is perceived to be constant, even though
changes in perspective make the objects appo;.r to have different shapes (e.g.,
a wheel from the side appears Circular, at an angle it appears elliptical, and from
the front it appears rectangular, but the perception of the shape of the wheel
remains constant).
Loudness Constancy-The loudness of a sound is perceived to be constant, even
though a change in distance makes the sound seem softer or louder (e.g., music
playing on a radio seems to get softer as you walk away from it, but the perception
of the volume of the radio remains constant).
All senses exhibit constancy to some extent. Consider the tendency when design-
ing high-fidelity renderings, simulations, or models of objects and environments.
For example, changes in properties like distance, perspective, and illumination
should change appropriately for the type of interaction. Use recognizable objects
and distance cues to provide size and shape references for unfamiliar objects.
Consider illumination levels and background colors in environments when making
decisions about color and brightness levels; lighting and color variations in the
environment can trick the senses and alter the perception of color.
See also Color, Highlighting, Interference Effects, and Orientation Sensitivity.
48 UnIVersal PrinCiples of DeSign
1 Also known as perceptual constancy.
1 Seminal works on constancy include
"Brightness Constancy and the Nature of
Achromatic Colors" by Hans Wallach, Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 1948, vol. 38, p.
310--324; and ~ De\ermjnants of Apparent
Visual Size With Distance Varianr by A. F.
Holway and Edwin G. Boring, American
Journal of Psychology, 1941, vol. 54, p. 21- 37.
A nice revIeW of the various forms of constancy
IS found in SensatIOn and Perceplion by
Ma@retW. Matlin ard Hugh J. foley, 4th ed.,
Allyn & BacOfl, 1997.
Despite their apparent differences. the
pc1lr of circles Within the grid blocks
are the same color and b right ness~
a fact easily revealed by covering the
afeas surrounding the Circles.
The perceived differences are caused
by correction errors made by the
Visual procesSing system, which tries
to maintain constancy by offsetting
color and bnghtness variations across
different background conditIOns.
Con~ tdncy 49


=== ENTRY: Constraint (pp 26-26) ===

A method or limiting the actions that can be performed on
a system.
Constraints limit the possible actions that can be performed on a system. For
example, dimming or hiding options that are not available at a particular time
effectively constrains the options that can be selected. Proper application of con-
straints in this fashion makes designs easier to use and dramatically reduces the
probability of error during Interaction. There are two basic kinds of constraints:
physical constraints and psychological constraints,l
Physical constraints limit the range of possible actions by recirecting physical
motion in specific ways. The three kinds of physical constraints are paths, axes,
and barriers. Paths convert applied forces into linear or curvilinear motion using
channels or grooves (e.g., scroll bar in software user inlerfaces). Axes convert
applied forces into rotary motion, effectively providing a control surface of infinite
length in a small space (e.g., a trackball). Barriers absorb or deflect appliec forces,
thereby halting, slowing, or recirecting the forces around the barrier (e.g., bound-
aries of a computer screen). Physical constraints are useful for reducing the
sensitivity of controls to unwanted inputs, and denying certain kinds of inputs
altogether. Paths are useful in situations where the control variable range is rela-
tively small and bounded. Axes are useful in situations where control real estate is
limited, or the control variables are very large or unbounded. Barriers are useful
for denying errant or undesired actions.
Psychological constraints limit the range of possible actions by leveraging the way
people perceive and think about the world. The three kinds of psychological con-
straints are symbols, conventions, and mappings. Symbols innuence behavior by
communicating meaning through language, such as the text and icon on a warn-
ing sign. Conventions innuence behavior based on learned traditions and prac-
tices, such as ~red means stop, green means go." Mappings influence behavior
based on the perceived relationships between elements. For example, light
switches that are close to a set of lights are perceivec to be more relatec than
switches that are far away. Symbols are useful for labeling, explaining, and warning
using visual, aural, and tactile representation---all three if the message is critical.
Conventions indicate common methods of understanding and interacting, and are
useful for making systems consistent and easy to use. Mappings are useful for
implying what actions are possible based on the visibility, location, and appear-
ance of controls.2
Use constraints in design to simplify usability and minimize errors. Use physical
constraints to reduce the sensitivity of controls, minimize unintentional inputs,
and prevent or slow dangerous actions. Use psychological constraints to improve
the clarity and intuitiveness of a design.
See also Affordance, Archetypes, Control, Errors, Forgiveness, and Mapping.
50 UIHvf'rSi11 Pllnclples of DeSign
1 The seminal work on psychological constraints
is The Design of Everyday Tflings by Donald
Norman, Doubleday, 1990.
, Note that Norman uses the terms semantic
constraints, cultural constraints, and logical
conSlIaints.
Physical Constraints
Paths
@]
@
Axes
Barriers
~
I
..a
...
-
Brightness
I
J
Contrast
I
J-
Hue
I
J
Saturation
I
}--
Psychological Constraints
Symbols
0
~ v-
POISON
WOMEN
Conventions
~~~
~~~
r---~ [ RE!
RD 1
Mappings
~ ~
Volume
~
Constrainl 51


=== ENTRY: Control (pp 27-27) ===

The level of control provided by a system s~10uld be
related to the proficiency and experience levels of the
people using the system.
People should be able to exercise control over what a system does, but the level of
control should be related to their proficiency and experience using the system.
Beginners do best with a reduced amount of control, while experts do best with
greater control. A simple example is when children learn to ride a bicycle. Initially,
training wheels are helpful in reducing the difficulty of riding by reducing the level
of control (e.g., eliminating the need to balance while riding). This allows the child
to safely develop basic riding skills with minimal risk of accident or injury. Once the
basic skills are mastered, the training wheels get in the way, and hinder perform-
ance. As expertise increases, so too does the need for greater controLl
A system can accommodate these varying needs by offering multiple ways to
perform a task. For example, novice users of word processors typically save their
documents by accessing the File menu and selecting Save, whereas more profi-
cient users typically save their documents using a keyboard shortcut Both
methods achieve the same outcome, but one favors simplicity and structure, while
the other favors efficiency and flexibility. This tradeoff is standard when allocating
system control. Beginners benefit from structured interactions with minimal
choices, typically supported by prompts, constraints, and ready access to help.
Experts benefit from less structured interactions that provide more direct access to
functions, bypassing the support devices of beginners. Since accommodating mul-
tiple methods increases the complexity of the system, the number of methods for
any given task should be limited to tvvo-------Dne for beginners, and one for experts.
The need to provide expert shortcuts is limited to systems that are used frequently
enough for people to develop expertise. For example, the design of museum
kiosks and ATMs should assume that all users are first-time users, and not try
to accommodate varying levels of expertise. When systems are used frequently
enough for people to develop expertise, it is often useful to provide simple ways to
customize the system design. This represents the highest level of control a design
can provide. It enables the appearance and configuration of a system to be
aligned with personal preferences and level of expertise, and enables the
efficiency of use to be fine-tuned according to individual needs over time.
Consider the allocation of control in the design of complex systems. When possi-
ble, use a method that is equally simple and efficient for beginners and experts.
Otherwise, provide methods specialized for beginners and experts. Conceal expert
methods to the extent possible to minimize complexity for beginners. When sys-
tems are complex and frequently used, consider designs that can be customized
to conform to individual preference and levels of expertise.
See also Constraint, Flexibility-Usability Tradeoff, and Hierarchy of Needs.
52 UJllversal PrulclpJes of DeSign
I See, for example, TIm Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction by Stuart K. Card,
Thomas P. Moran, and Allen Newell. lilwrence
Erlbaum Associates. 1983: and The Humane
Interface; New Directions for Designing
Interactive Syslems by Jef Raskin, Addlson-
Wesley 2<XXl.
D ·"
V
Actions - Frome
I I!1 Actions for Frome 1 of Loyer Name layer I
golo: Go 10 the specified frame of the movie
o Go to and Play
@ Go to and Slop
Scene: I <current ~cene>
Type: ! Frome Number
L
Frome: 11
-
)~ 'i'1 -:-
gotaAndSlop( 1);
r line I: gOloAndStap(1l;
0 ;";
... ....
......
....
I ; V
Actions· Frame
I 1!I Action~ for Frome 1 of layer Nome layer 1
+ fol'h $ v
~ (9.
gatoAndStopll );
111'-1
line 2 of 2. Call
~
§
:=-"
, I """'
~ ~
10
, I
10
or.! ..
&
./ Normal Mode
.
~
Expert Mode
View Line Numbers
r:;
;;::::::,::;':: EI
~-
'I ~
~
,~
Normal Mode
I •
./ Expert Mode
View Line Numbers
~
~ . •
[0,
One method of accommodating
roficiency IS to provide
ods of Interaction for
variations in p
different meth
beginners an
Macrornedia
and expert de
d experts. For example,
Flash SLlpports novice
velopers by providing
modes wilen wI'iting
ing the Expel1 Mode
lstrained command
edllol lield. Selecting
permits constrained
uinng commands to
different user
scripts. Selecl
permils uncar
entry Inlo the
Normal Mode
entry only, req
be entered int a specialized fields
so thai they can be immediately
checked FOJ correctness.
Conlrol 53


=== ENTRY: Convergence (pp 28-28) ===

A process in which similar characteristics evolve inde-
pendently in multiple systems.
Natural or human-made systems that best approximate optimal strategies afforded
by the environment tend to be successful, while systems exhibiting lesser approxi-
mations tend to become extinct. This process results in the convergence of form
and function over time. The degree of convergence in an environment indicates its
stability and receptivity to different kinds of innovation.
In nature, for example, the features of certain early dinosaurs- use of surface
area for thermoregulation, and scales as an outer skin-
evolved over millions of
years to become the birds we see today. The genesis of flight for birds is different
from that of other flying organisms such as bats and butterflies, but the set of
adaptations for flight in all organisms has converged to just gliding and flapping. In
human-created designs, this process can happen more quickly. For example, the
design of virtually all automobiles today includes elements such as a four-wheel
chassis, steering wheel, and an internal combustion engine- a convergence of
form and fu nction in decades versus millions of years. I
In both cases, the high degree of convergence indicates a stable environment-
one that has not changed much over time-and designs that closely approximate
the optimal strategies afforded by that environment. The result is a rate of evolu-
tion that is slow and incremental, tending toward refinements on existing
convergent themes. Contrast this with the life-forms during the Cambrian period
(570 million years ago) and dot-com companies of the 1990s; both periods of
great diversity and experimentation of system form and function. This low degree
of convergence indicates a volatile environment- one that is still changing- with
few or no stable optimal strategies around which system designs can converge.
The result is a rapid and disruptive rate of evolution, often resulting in new and
innovative approaches that depart from previous designs?
Consider the level of stability and convergence in an environment prior to design.
Stable environments with convergent system designs are receptive to minor inno-
vations and refinements but resist radica l departures from established designs.
Unstable environments with no convergent system designs are receptive to major
innovations and experimentation, but offer little guidance as to which designs may
or may not be successful. Focus on variations of convergent designs in stable
environments, and explore analogies with other environments and systems for
guidance when designing for new or unstable environments. 3
See also Iteration and Mimicry.
54 UnIversa l Principles 01 Design
I See, lor example, Gats' Paws and Catapults'
Mechanical Worlds of Nature and People by
Steven Vogel, W. W. Norton & Company, 2000.
, For opposing perspectives on convergence in
evolution, see Wonderful Life: The Burgess
Shale and the Nature of History by Stephen
Jay Gould, W. W. Norton & Company, 1990;
and The Crucible of Creation: The Burgess
Shale and the Rise of Animals by Simon
Conway Morris, Oxford University Press, 1998.
J Alternatively, environments can be modified.
For example, stable environments can be
destabilized to promote innovation-
e.g., a
shift from managed markets to free markets.
Environmental and system analogies
often reveal new design possibilities.
The set of strategies for flight has
converged to just gliding and (lapping
but expands to include buoyancy
and jet propulsion when flight is
reconsidered as movement through a
fluid. In Ulis case, tile degree of con-
vergence st ill indicates environments
that have been stable for some time.
New flying systems tllat do not use
one or more of Ulese strategies are
unlikely to compete successfully in
similar environments.
Jet Propulsion
Buoyancy
Convergence 55


=== ENTRY: Cost-Benefit (pp 29-29) ===

An activity will be pursued only if its benefits are equal to
or greater than the costs,
From a design perspective, the cost-benefit principle is typically used to assess the
financial return associated with new features and elements. The cost-benefit prin-
ciple can also be applied to assess design quality from a user perspective. If the
costs associated with interacting with a design outweigh the benefits, the design is
poor. If the benefits outweigh the costs, the design is good. For example, walking
some distance to see a museum exhibit constitutes a cost. The pleasure of seeing
interesting things in the museum constitutes a benefit, if the benefit of that pleasure-
able experience outweighs the cost of the walk, the exibit design is good.
The quality of every design aspect can be measured using the cost-benefit principle.
How'much reading is too much to get the point of a message? How many steps
are too many to set the time and date of a video recorder? How long is too long for
a person to wait for a Web page to download? The answer to all of these questions
is that it depends on the benefits of the interaction to that specific user. For example,
the often-cited maximum acceptable download time for pages on the Internet is ten
seconds. However, the acceptability of download time is a function of the benefits
provided by the downloaded page. The high benefit of a particular page can more
than compensate for the cost of a download taking longer than ten seconds.
Conversely, a low-benefit page is not worth the cost of any download time. Reducing
interaction costs does improve the quality of the design, but it is a mistake to focus
exclusively on simplifying design to reduce these costs without considering the
interaction benefits. Some potentially complicated (i.e., high cost) interactions may
be worthwhile to the user if the resulting benefit is correspondingly high,
A common mistake regarding application of the cost-benefit principle is to presume
which aspects of a system will be perceived as costs, and which will be perceived
as benefits. For example, new design features or elements that excite designers are
often never used or even noticed by people who interact with the design. In many
cases, such features and elements increase the design's interaction costs by
adding complexity to the system without adding any actual benefit to the user. In
order to avoid this, observe people interacting with the design or similar designs in
the actual target environment. Focus groups and usability tests are valuable in
assessing the cost-benefits of different aspects of a design during development,
when observation of the design in actual use is not possible.
Consider tile cost~benefit principle in all aspects of design. Do not make design
decisions based on cost parameters alone without due consideration of the bene-
fits realized from interactions. Verify cost-benefit perceptions of target populations
through careful observations, focus groups, and usability tests.
See also B0120 Rule, Aesthetic-Usability Effect, and Expectation Effect.
56 Universal Principles of DeSign
Discount ! I
w. d"n', won' , .. 10 •• VDU .. 0 """"m .....
""' . ,,, """,,,I.'lng yo", .. ,dl,'
10 .ncor.or~ I"'" 10 ","chUO "'ll" ""w, .. o'ro offtrWl\l \h'
ADDITIONAL FIVE DOLLAR orSCOUNT CO UPON
From a user perspective, Internet
advertiSing via pop-up wIndows IS
all cosl and no benefll. If Ihe adver-
tisements were plOpelly designed
to minimize cost and maximize
benelit, people would be more
likely to pay attention anLl fat 111
f>Osillve associations Wltll them.
Tilese banner advertisements demon-
strate one method 01 ullprovlng the
cosl-ooneht of Internet advertISIng;
creative mteractlvity. Whetller shoolulg
vii uses, plaYing slols, or engagIng In
wOld play, these advertisements use
enlerkl!nment to compensate people
lor thell tune and attention
@JO@JOOCYJOO ~1~~usandMB
ABCDE FG H I JK L MNDPO RS TUVWX Y Z
',I
1
'.-- "
!II~
,
-
-
I
III
I,'III
,1\
I
.,
WINNER'S
CASINO
C:;llJlPl1\\lI ~
WINNER 'S
CASINO
Match 3 logos
and win 3 free nights
Cust-Benefit 57


=== ENTRY: Credits (pp 108-109) ===

Accessibility
For more information aooul accessible design,
please visit the Center fOf Universal Design at
WNW.design.ncsu.edulcud. Special Ulanks to Sally
Haile for her assistance.
Aesthetic-Usability Effect
Photographs of phones courtesy of Nokia. liVe
screen shots e 2002 liVe Inc. All rights reserved.
IItfordance
Photograph of Segway courtesy of Segway, ue.
Photograph of teakettle and peeler courtesy of
QXO International.
Archetypes
ImilHeS courtesy of Sue Weidemann Brill. Design
concepts by Michael Brill, illustrations by Safdar
Abidi. Other learn member!> involved in the project
included Dieler G. Ast, Ward H. Goodenough,
Maureen Kaplan. Frederick J. Newmeyer, and
Woodruff Sullivan. Michael Brill passed away
unexpectedly on July 26, 2002, dUring the
development of this book. The design commUnity
is poorer fot his absence, for more inf(l(malion
about Michael Brill's work, please visit
YNNI.bosti.com.
Attractiveness Bias
Photographs of Kennedy and Nixon 0
Bettman/Corbis.
Baby-Face Bias
PhOtograph of Teletubbies C 1996-2003 Ragdoll
Ltd. Used With permission.rul rights reserved.
Chunking
Screen shot of e-learning course
courtesy of EduNeering. Inc.
Classical Conditioning
Poster courtesy of Texas Department of
Transportation. Photograph by Rob Buck.
Advertising campaign by Sherry Matlhem
Advocacy Marketing. For more Information about
Jacqueline's story and recovery progress, please
visit WNW.helpjacquLcom.
Cognitive Dissoo.3nce
Image of AOL CD e 2002 America Online. Inc. All
rights reserved.
Consistency
Photographs courtesy of Bob Evans Farms.
Special thanks to Jeff Tenut of DiscovcrUnk fO(
his assistance.
Constraint
The Apple iPod is a trademark of Apple Computer,
Inc. All rights reserved.
Controt
Macromedia Flash is a trademark of Macromedia.
Inc. All rights reserved.
214 Umversal PrinCiples of Design
Depth of Processing
Screen shot of e-If>..arning course courtesy of
EduNeering, Inc.
Entry Point
Photographs of WSJ courtesy of Dow Jones &
Company. Special thanks to Mario Garcia of Garcia
Media for his assistance.
Exposure Effect
Posters courtesy of Ota Nepily. Studio Gappa,
Brno, Czech Republic. The posters on this page
and similar works are available for purchase at
WNW.poster. WI.a.. Special thanks to Petr Kuca
fO( his assistance.
Forgiveness
Photograph of parachuting plane courtesy of
Ballistic Recovery Systems, Inc. ScreenshOt of
history palette taken from Adobe Photoshop.
Adobe Photoshop is a registered trademark of
Adobe Systems. Inc. All rights reserved.
Form Follows Function
Photowaphs of HUMMER H2 taken by Tim
Simmons Photography lor Modernista!. Ltd.
Photographs of HUMMER Hl taken by Stuart
Harnilton Photography for Modernista!. Ltd.
HUMVEE images are courtesy of General Motors
Corp. and American General Corp_ Photographs
of HUMMER courtesy 01 2002 General Motors
Corporat;oo. Used with permiSSion of HUMMER
and General Motors.
Framing
Advertisements courtesy of the Ohio State
University Department of Histay.
Golden Rallo
The Apple IPod is a registered trademark of Apple
Com puler, Inc.
Gutenberg Diagram
Photographs of WSJ courtesy of Daw Jones &
Company. Speciat thanks to Mario Garcia of GarCI{)
Media fOf his assistance.
Immersion
Photographs of the R.M_S. Titanic exhibit courtesy
of Clear Channel Communications.
Law of PrJgnanz
Photographs of Mars' face courtesy of NASA.
Mapping
Photograph of Segway HT courte!:y of Segway. LLC.
Mimicry
PhOtograph of Sony AIBO courtesy of Sony
ElectrQ(l1cs Inc.
Ockham's Razor
Photograph of celIO courtesy of Yamaha
Corporation of America. Photograph 01 Taburet
stool courtesy of Design Within Reach.
Operant Condilloning
Rendered creatures from Black & Wllile
Q Uonhead Studios.
Readability
Fry's Readability Graph reproduced with perm is-
siQ(ltrom The McGraw-Hili Companies.
Rule of Thirds
Photographs of All vs. uston and Ali vs. Frasier
Q BettmaniCorbis.
Satisficing
Photographs courtesy of NASA.
Savanna Preference
Photograph of Teletubblcs C 1996-2003 Ragdoll
ltd. Used with permiSSIOn. All fights reserved.
Self-Simi/arity
M.e. Escher's Sma/ler and SmailerC 2002 Ccnlon
Art---8aam. Holland. All rights reserved.
Photomosaic by Robert SilversiRunawilY Technology
Inc. For more information about the oork of Robert
Silvers. please visit l'M'W.photOlTlosiac.com.
Storytelling
Photographs of Civil Rights Memorial courtesy of
Southern Poverty law Center. Photographs by
John O'Hag,3n. Designed by Maya Un.
Structural Forms
Photographs of RDFW courtesy of Geocell
Systems. Pod photograph courtesy of SanfOfd
Ponder. Icosa Village. Inc.
Threat Delection
Photograph of billboard courtesy of University of
Houston. Photograph by Pam Francis Photography.
Three-Dimensional PrOjeCtIOn
Screenshots of Black & White 0 Uonhead Studios.
Top-Dawn Lighting Bias
Rendered man images courtesy 01 Gerry Manacsa.
von Restorff Effect
Photographs of billboards courtesy of Chick-fil-A,
Inc. Photographs of Shamu One courtesy of
Southwest Airlines and SeaWorld- San Antonio.
Photograph by Bob French.
Waist-te-Hip Ratio
Photograph of manneqUins courtesy of Adel
Rootstein. Inc. Drawn images reproduced with
permission from Devendra Singh.
Wayfinding
Map courtesy of Pittsburgh Zoo
and PPG Aquarium. lIIuslration by David Klug.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank a number of people and organizations that con-
tributed to this work. First, we would like to thank the many contributors whose
works are featured, and ask that readers review the credits section to learn more
about these very talented individuals and companies. Second, we would like to
thank the wonderful people at Rockport Publishers for their encouragement, sup-
port, and professionalism. Finally, we would like to thank a number of individuals
on a personal level for their support and involvement in the development of this
book. These include Wendy Adair, Peggy Adams, Sue Weidemann Brill, Robert
Delamontagne, Kristin Ellison, Mario Garcia, Chris Jensen, Melanie Jones, Petr
Kuca, Janet Lea, David Learned, Gerry Manacsa, Jacqueline Saburido, Michael
Schaner, Paul Selvaggio, Robert Silvers, Devendra Singh, Jeff Tenut, Carole
Thomson, and Aaron Warren.
Acknowledgments 215
About the Authors
William LidweU is a partner and chief research and development officer at the
Applied Management Sciences Institute. Kritina Holden is a lead usability engineer
at BMC Software. Jill Butler is the founder and president of Stuff Creators Design
Studio. The authors live in Houston, Texas.
More information about Universal Principles of Design-including updates,
recommended readings, and author information- can be found at
WWN.stuffcreators.comiupod.
216 Unlver'i,ll PrinCiples of Design


=== ENTRY: Defensible Space (pp 30-30) ===

A space that has territorial markers, opportunities for sur-
veillance, and clear indications of activity and ownership.
Defensible spaces are used to deter crime. A defensible space is an area such as a
neighborhood, house, park, or office that has features that convey ownership and
afford easy and frequent surveillance. These features allow residents to establish
control over their private and community property, and ultimately deter criminal
activity. There are three key features of defensible spaces: territoriality, surveillance.
and symbolic barriers.'
Territoriality is the establishment of clearly defined spaces of ownership. Common
territorial features include community markers and gates to cultivate a community
identity and mark the collective territory of residents; visible boundaries such as
walls, hedges, and fences to create private yards; and privatization of public serv-
ices so that residents must take greater personal responsibility and ownership
(e.g., private trash cans instead of public dumpsters). These territorial elements
explicitly assign custodial responsibility of a space to residents, and communicate
to outsiders that the space is owned and protected.
Surveiffance is the monitoring of the environment during normal daily activities.
Common surveillance features include external lighting; windows and doors that
open directly to the outside of first-floor dwellings; mailboxes located in open and
well-trafficked areas; and well-maintained courtyards, playgrounds, and walkways
that increase pedestrian activity and casual surveillance. These features make it
more difficult for people to engage in unnoticed activities.
Symbolic barriers are objects placed in the environment to create the perception
that a person's space is cared for and worthy of defense. Common symbolic
barriers include picnic tables, swings, flowers, and lawn furniture-any symbol that
conveys that the owner of the property is actively involved in using and maintaining
the property. Note that when items that are atypical for a community are displayed,
it can sometimes symbolize affluence and act as a lure rather than a barrier.
Therefore, the appropriateness of various kinds of symbolic barriers must be con-
sidered within the context of a particular community.l
Incorporate defensible space features in the design of residences, offices, indus-
trial facilities, and communities to deter crime. Clearly mark territories to indicate
ownership and responsibility; increase opportunities for surveillance and reduce
environmental elements that allow concealment; reduce unassigned open spaces
and services; and use typical symbolic barriers to indicate activity and use.
See also Control, Prospect-Refuge, Visibility, and Wayfinding.
58 Universal Principles of Design
I The seminal works 0f1 defensible space are
Defensible Space: People and Desigll in the
Violent City, Macmillan, 1972; and Creating
Defensible Space, U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, 1996, ooth
by Oscar Newman.
, ~Territorial Cues and Defensible Space Theory:
The Burglar's Point of ViewH by Julie E.
MacDonald and Robert Gilford, Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 1989, vol. 9, p.
193-205.
Before
Elements that indicate ownersllip and
Improve surveillance enhance the
defenSibility of a space. In this case,
tile addition of community markers
and gating indicates a territolY tllat is
owned by the community; improved
lighting and pubhc benches increase
opportunities for casual surveillance;
and local fences. doormats, sllrubbery,
and other symbolic barriers clearly
convey that tile space is owned
and maintained.
After
JI
Territoriality
Surveillance
Symbolic Barriers
Defensible Space 59


=== ENTRY: Depth of Processing (pp 31-31) ===

A pllenomenon of memory in wilich information that is
analyzed deeply is better reca lled tilan illformation tilat is
analyzed superficially.'
Thinking hard about information improves the likelihood that the information will
be recalled at a later time. For example, consider two tasks that involve interacting
with and recalling the same information. In the first task, a group of people is
asked to locate a keyY.'ord in a list and circle it. In the second task. another group
of people is asked to locate a keyword in a list, circle it, and then define it. After a
brief time, both groups are asked to recall the keywords from the tasks. The group
that performed the second task will have better recall of the keyvvords because
they had to analyze the keywords at a deeper level than the group in the first task;
they had to think harder about the informalion!'
This phenomenon of memory results from the two ways in which information is
processed, known as maintenance rehearsal and elaborative rehearsal. Main-
tenance rehearsal simply repeats the same kind of analysis that has already
been carried out. For example, people often use maintenance rehearsal when
they repeat a phone number back to themselves to help them remember; no addi-
tional analysis is performed on the phone number. Elaborative rehearsal involves
a deeper, more meaningful analysis of the information. For example, people
engage in elaborative rehearsal when they read a text passage and then have
to answer questions about the meaning of the passagej additional analysis as to
word and sentence meaning require additional thought. Generally, elaoorative
rehearsal results in recall performance that is two to tllree times better than
maintenance rehearsal.)
The key determining factors as to how deeply information is processed are the dis-
tinctiveness of the information, the relevance of the information, and the degree to
which the informalion is elaborated. Distinctiveness refers to the uniqueness of the
information relative to surrounding information and previous experience. Relevance
refers to the degree to which the information is perceived to be important. The
degree of elaboration refers to how much thought is required to interpret and
understand the information. Generally, deep proceSSing of information that involves
these factors will result in the best possible recall and retention of information.4
Consider depth of processing in design contexts where recall and retention of
information is important. Use unique presentation and interesting activities to
engage people to deeply process information. Use case studies, examples, and
other devices to make information relevant to an audience. Note that deep
proceSSing requires more concentration and effort than mere exposure (e.g.,
classroom lecture), and therefore frequent periods of rest should be incorporated
into the presentation and tasks.
See also Advance Organizer, Mnemonic Device, Picture Superiority Effect, and
von Restorff Effecl.
60 Urlrversal PrInciples of Design
1 Also known as levels-of-processing approach.
l The seminal work on depth of processing is
~ levels of Processing: A Framework for
Memory RcsearchM by Fergus l. M. Craik and
Robert S. Lockhart, Journal o( Verbal Learnlllg
and Verbal 8ehrlVlor. 1972, vol. 11 , p.
67\-684.
1 See. for example. ~ Depth of Processmg and
the Retention of WOfds in Episodic Memory"
by Fergus I. M. Cralk and Endel Tulving,
Journal of Experimental Psycholugy: General,
1975, vol. 104, p. 268-294.
• See, 101" example, ~ The Self as a Mnemonic
Device; The Role of Internal Cues~ by Francis
S. 8ellena. Joomal of PefSDnali/y and Social
Psyc/)ology. 1984. vol. 47, p. 506-516.
Shallow
Text
Level of Processing
- - -
---
- - -
Text
Images
Deep
- --
---
- --
---
Text
Images
Questions
The more deeply learners process
information, the better they learn.
Depth of processlllg 15 Improved
through the use of multiple presenta·
tlon media and learning actrvilies
tllat engage learners In elaborative
rehearsal- as in this e·learning
course by EduNeenng.
EDU~EERING
0..-
,.,
RH pon ...
,,-,
. u ..
Ch1llleog_
Cllmmonts
EMit
How do I use a fire extinguisher?
pull
...
The PASS rule
lu ".". n ... c'ht1fUUll« e""~,,') .
r"' ..... It.: Msa flu .. """"' .... H
•• t. work .... ltC:tlc •••
Click. each bUbon bdow 10 leam more about the PASS rule .jJ
Slife work prllctlces
LiIlIN IInHl~ ht, orrll"",,kOlltook
""hollOlwdurirq lho hlrdIo On INboc:k
ofn".>I.",.PIoc.,Mn..
.11.1to' .. JOj .. r .. ' ...... T1>:al
~oolho ooulo. ro<i:o&.--,r-
,..
Apply !belt' .aft work. prac:bl:tI when usina a lire ~
T"""ru..·. S ..... Ot>dpOtUc\ll.t,[ .... ·o/Itnpulcll'by
lit .... o d ioiatpoolw 10 ... yuporind oflbo n_.
K..- you< ...npI ... _
.... 'Y. hoY. OIl ... op ........
Iflhtt Ii" .. bIocbna ,....... .".,.. 'ouu" Ibo lit ........ ,,, ......
Con 1>0 " •• d '0 <1 ••• "I, poll> 1I~<>Uf!l:> II .. N ••
Iftha fu.i. in •• 0"" ond yOll .. "no, ••• ily .on' •• ' iI. &01
out tmmOd:iol. ly .... d .1IU1111. doo, 10 .onfin. III. 1\1 ••
If.ru ...... . Io • • d ...... lit ... OJNf' . cIo<>< ' o 01' •• 10
"';"swsh IlIO 61. Tho 11_. could i-Joop out 01 ,..... .. I
How much have you learned?
PrlIoltC.e )lOW knowledge by compleq th!: 3CII'lity below ~
q: ThefimslepmunnJal'n~XIIJ\IUlShtrreonmly.m
.:t
rn r=:p 60m sO: m sd:
[!] P1Dm. p~ ~
; .. m""=""~
1 rn '""" 'N ''''ule
: .. bJ:oI=L Rmrmbtrw PASS ,m.-puIl,lILI1I.lqIftze.m:l
......
Dr r th 01 Protesslng 61


=== ENTRY: Development Cycle (pp 32-32) ===

Successful products typically follow four stages of creation:
requirements, design, development, and testing.
All products progress sequentially through basic stages of creation. Understanding
and using effective practices for each stage allQINS designers to maximize a prod-
uct's probability of success. There are four basic stages of creation for all prod-
ucts: requirements, design, development, and testing.)
Requirements
In formal processes, requirements are gathered through market research, customer
feedback, focus groups, and usability testing. Informally, design requirements are
often derived from direct knowledge or experience. Design requirements are best
obtained through controlled interactions between designers and members of the
target audience, and not simply by asking people what they want or like- often
they do not know. or cannot clearly articulate their needs.
Design
This stage is where design requirements are translated into a form that yields a set
of specifications. The goal is to meet the design requirements, though an implicit
goal is to do so in a unique fashion. Excellent design is usually accomplished
through careful research of existing or analogous solutions, active brainstorming of
many diverse participants, ample use of prototyping, and many iterations of trying,
testing, and tuning concepts. A design that is appreciably the same at the begin-
ning and end of this stage is probably not much of a design.
Development
The development stage is where design specifications are transformed into an
actual product. The goal of development is to precisely meet the design specifica-
tions. TY/O basic quality control strategies are used to accomplish this: reduce
variability in the materials, creations of parts, and assembly of parts, and verify that
specifications are being maintained throughout the development process.
Testing
The testing stage is where the product is tested to ensure that it meets design
requirements and specifications, and will be accepted by the target audience.
Testing at this stage generally focuses on the quality of modules and their integra-
tion, real-world performance (real contexts, real users), and ease and reliability
of installation.
Gather requirements through controlled interactions with target audiences, rather
than simple feedback or speculation by team members. Use research, brainstorm-
ing, prototyping, and iterative design to achieve optimal designs. Minimize variabil-
ity in products and processes to improve quality. Test all aspects of the design to
the degree possible.
See also Hierarchy of Needs, Iteration, Ufe Cycle, Prototyping, and Scaling Fallacy.
62 UnIVersal Principles of Design
I A nice treatment of contemporary procluct
development issues and strategies is found In
Products in Half the lime: New Rules, New
Tools by Preston G. Smith and Donald G.
Reinertsen, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd ed., 1997;
and Managing the Design Factory: The
PtrxJuct Developer's Toolkit by Donald G.
Reinertsen, Free Press, 1997.
Unear
Requirements
Design
Development
Testing
Iterative
Requirements
Design
Development
Testing
100%
Il'
I I
I II
I I
I
Time --------------------------------.
III IIII IIII IIII IIII
III I
TIme -------------------------------->
AIlIl0Llgil progress through tile devel-
opment cycle is sequenllal, It can
be linear or iterative. The linear model
(also known as the waterfall moden
proceeds through the development
cycle once, completing each stage
befOl'E proceeding to tile next. The
Iterallve model (also known as the
swat moden proceeds through Ihe
development cycle lTIultlple times,
completing an increaslllg percentage
of each stage with each Iteration.
The linear model is preferred when
requirements and specifications are
exact and unchanging, and the cost
of Iteration is protlibitive. In aU otller
cases, the Iterallve model is preferred.
Development Cycle 63


=== ENTRY: Entry Point (pp 33-33) ===

A point of physical or attentional entry into a design.
People do judge books by their covers, Internet sites by their first pages, and
buildings by their lobbies. This initial impression of a system or environment
greatly influences subsequent perceptions and attitudes, which then affects the
quality of subsequent interactions. This impression is largely formed at the entry
point to a system or environment. For example, entering many Internet sites
entails going through a slow-loading splash screen, followed by a slow-loading
main page, followed by several pop-up windows with advertisements-all this to
enter a site that mayor may not have the information the person was looking for.
Such errors in entry point design annoy visitors who make it through, or deter
visitors altogether. Either way, it does not promote additional interaction. The key
elements of good entry point design are minimal barriers, points of prospect, and
progressive lures. I
Minimal Barriers
Barriers should not encumber entry points. Examples of barriers to entry are highly
trafficked parking lots, noisy displays with many unnecessary elements, sales-
people standing at the doors of retail stores, or anything that impedes people from
getting to and moving through an entry point. Barriers can be aesthetic as well as
functional in nature. For example, a poorly maintained building front or landscape
is an aesthetic barrier to entry.
Points of Prospect
Entry points should allow people to become oriented and clearly survey available
options. Points of prospect include store entrances that provide a clear view of
store layout and aisle signs, or Internet pages that provide good orientation cues
and navigation options. Points of prospect should provide sufficient time and
space for a person to review options with minimal distraction or disruption- i.e.,
people should not feel hurried or crowded by their surroundings or other people.
Progressive Lures
Lures should be used to attract and pull people through the entry point.
Progressive lures can be compelling headlines from the front page of a newspaper,
greeters at restaurants, or the display of popular prooucts or destinations (e.g.,
restrooms) just beyond the entry point of a store. Progressive lures get people to
incrementally approach, enter, and move through the entry point.
Maximize the effectiveness of the entry point in a design by reducing barriers,
establishing clear points of prospect, and using progressive lures. Provide suffi-
cient time and space for people to review opportunities for interaction at the entry
point. Consider progressive lures like highlighting, entry point greeters, and
popular offerings visibly located beyond the entry point to get people to enter and
progress through.
See also Immersion, Prospect-Refuge, and Wayfinding.
64 Universal Principles of DeSign
1 See, for example, Why We Buy: The Science of
Shopping by Paco Underhill, Touchslone
Books, 2CXXJ; Hotel DeslgIl, Planning, and
Development by Walter A. Rutes, Richard H.
Penner, Lawrence Adams, W. W. Norton &
Company, 2001; and "The Stanford-Poynter
Eyetracking Study~ by Marion Lewenstein,
Greg Edwards, Deborah Tatar, and Andrew
DeVigal. htlp:fMww.poynterexlra.org.
Apple Computer retail stores maintain
the high standards of design excellence
for which Apple is known. TIle stores
appear more like museums than retail
shops, creating tempting visual spec-
tacles that are hard to pass by.
Tile redesign of the Wall Street Journal
creates a clear entry point to each
edition by highlighting the region of
the page containing news summaries.
The summaries also act as a point of
prospect, allowing readers to qUickly
scan lor stories of interesl with no
competing visual barriers. Page refer-
ences on select summaries act as
progressive lures, leading readers to
the full articles in different sections
01 the paper.
Apple Retail Store
Levell
A glass Iront
eliminates visual barriers.
A large point of prospect is provided
after entry to support orientation
and decision making.
THE WALL Sl'ROO JOURNAI.
*~:~:
•. ,. . .,...,-
~-"-
"
-'-
~.~
...... , ....
~}.-ir:-" .. ---~.
~~,~~ --"-
.......... ~ ..... '-'
.. ---.. ~
~-.~': . ';":-
~.-~. =:-::-
"nlf;o 7 ..
.:;.:;:----
;;--
The use of glass
minimizes visual barriers.
Products line the periphery of the
space, offering clear options
from the point of prospect.
A small set of glass stairs at the entry point
acts as a lure, creating the impression
of entering a special place.
A large glass staircase acts as a secondary
lure, creating the impression of entering
another special space.
Entry Point 65


=== ENTRY: Errors (pp 34-34) ===

An action or omission of action Yielding an unintended result.
Most accidents are caused by what is referred to as human error, yet most acci-
dents are actually due to design errors rather than errors of human operation. An
understanding of the causes of errors suggests specific design strategies that can
greatly reduce their frequency and severity. There are two basic types of errors:
slips and mistakes,'
Slips are sometimes referred to as errors of action or errors of execution, and
occur when an action is not what was intended. For example, a slip occurs when
a person dials a frequently dialed phone number when intending to dial a different
number. Slips are the result of automatic, unconscious processes, and frequently
result from a change of routine or an interruption of an action. For example, a
person forgets their place in a procedure when interrupted by a phone call. 2
Minimize slips by providing clear feedback on actions. Make error messages clear,
and include the consequences of the error, as well as corrective actions, if possi-
ble. Position controls to prevent accidental activation of functions that may have
detrimental consequences. When this is not possible, use confirmations to inter-
rupt the flow and verify the action. Consider the use of affordances and constraints
to influence actions.
Mistakes are sometimes referred to as errors of intention or errors of planning, and
occur when an intention is inappropriate. For example, a mistake occurs when a
nurse interprets an alarm incorrectly and then administers the incorrect medicine.
Mistakes are caused by conscious mental processes, and frequently result from
stress or decision-making biases. For example, a person is biased to select only
from visible options.
Minimize mistakes by increasing situational awareness and reducing environmen-
tal noise. Make key indicators and controls visible within one eyespan whenever
possible. Reduce stress and cognitive load by minimizing the auditory and visual
noise. Provide just enough feedback to accomplish warnings and other functions,
and no more. Consider the use of confirmations that require multiple steps to ver-
ify the intention of highly critical tasks. Train an error recovery and Iroubleshooting,
emphasizing communication with other team members.
Finally, always Incorporate the principle of forgiveness into a design. Forgiveness
refers to the use of design elements to reduce the frequency and severity of errors
when they occur, enhancing the design's safety and usability.
See also Affordance, Confirmation, Constraint, and Forgiveness,
66 Universal PfmC lPln~ 01 Design
I The seminal work on errors is ~Calegonzalion
of Action Slips· by Donald A. Norman,
Psychological Review, 1981. vol. 88, p. 1- 15;
and Absent Minded? The Psychology of Mental
Lapses and Everyday Errors by James Reason
and Klara Mycielska, Prentice-Hall, 1982.
1 Note that Ulere are many different error tax-
onomies. A nice review and discussion regard-
ing the various taxonomies is found in Human
Error by James Reason, Cambridge UniverSity
Press, 1990. A very readable and Interestmg
treatment of human error is Set Phasers on
Stun and other True Tales of DesIgn.
Technology, and Human Error by Steven
Casey. Aegean Publlstllng Company. 1998.
Two Types of Slips
Action
it Do you want (0
save the changes
to your documenl
before closing?
Attention
Software Instalatlon Step l i e 3' ~ ~
I
r~1JI[ Name
I
Your Company Name
~r-l-l -'
~ QiEI UiW
Three Types of Mistakes
Perception
DANGER
iI:'
NORMAL
2 ~
• j
OANG[R
time
Decision
~==jY~ESt
r---klhe~
NO
software Icon
YES
Does the
on the
----1f.S...
compuler
desklopl' ............... _NO
start from it';.
~
.. ..,
han:I~
compulcf
"'" "','"
'--___
-'C"'n.ROM?
NO
Knowledge
How to use a fire edinRulsher
P
pull the pin
A
aim Ihe hose at the flame
S
SQueeze the trigger
S
sweep hose from side In side
CAUSES Changes to repetitive tasks or habits
SOLUTIONS Provide clear and distinctive feedback
Use confirmations for critical tasks
Consider constraints, affordances, and mappings
<II EXAMPLE Confirmations are useful for disrupting behaviors and
verifying intent
CAUSES Distractions and interruptions
SOLUTIONS Provide clear orientation and status cues
Use highlighting to focus attention
Use alarms to attract attention for critical situations
<II EXAMPLE Clear orientation and status cues are useful for enabling
the easy resumption of interrupted procedures
CAUSES Incomplete or ambiguous feedback
SOLUTIONS Improve situational awareness
Provide clear and distinctive feedback
Track and display historical system behaviors
<IIEXAMPLE Historical displays are useful for revealing trends that are
not detectable in point-in-time displays
CAUSES Stress, decision biases, and overconfidence
SOLUTIONS Minimize information and environmental noise
Use checklists and decision trees
Train on error recovery and troubleshooting
<II EXAMPLE Decision trees and checklists are useful decision-making
and troubleshooting tools, especially in times of stress
CAUSES Lack of knowledge and poor communication
SOLUTIONS Use memory and decision aids
Standardize naming and operational conventions
Train using case studies and simulations
<IIEXAMPLE Memory mnemonics are useful strategies for remembering
critical information in emergency situations
El rors 67


=== ENTRY: Expectation Effect (pp 35-35) ===

A phenomenon in which perception and behavior changes
as a result of personal expectations 0 1' the expectations
of others.
The expectation effect refers to ways in which expectations affect perception and
behavior. Generally, when people are aware of a probable or desired outcome, their
perceptions and behavior are affected in some way. A few examples of this phe-
nomenon include the following:!
Halo effect-Employers rate the pertormance of certain employees more highly
than others based on their overall positive impression of those employees.
Hawthorne effect-
Employees are more productive based on their belief that
changes made to the environment will increase productivity.
Pygmalion effect-Students perform better or worse based on the expecta-
tions of their teacher.
Placebo effect-
Patients experience treatment effects based on their belief
that a treatment will work.
Rosenthal effect-Teachers treat students differently based on their expecta·
tions of how students will perform.
Demand characteristics-Participants in an experiment or interview provide
responses and act in ways that they believe are expected by the experimenter
or interviewer.
The expectation effect demonstrates that expectations can greatly influence percep·
tions and behavior. For example, tell a large group of people that a new product
will change their lives, and a significant number will find their lives changed . Once
a person believes something will happen, the belief alone is sufficient to create
that possibility irrespective of the actual performance of the product. Unfortunately,
this can have a negative impact on the ability to measure accurately a design's
success. Since designers are naturally biased toward their designs, they often
unintentionally influence test subjects through words or actions, or may omit
certain results in order to corroborate their expectations. Test subjects often
respond by seeking to meet the expectations communicated to them.
Keep the expectation effect in mind when introducing or promoting a new design.
When trying to persuade, leverage the effect by setting expectations in a credible
fashion to guide the target audience to the desired conclusion, rather than letting
them form their own. On the other hand, when you are simply evaluating a design,
you should aim to avoid biases resulting from the expectation effect by using proper
test procedures.
See also Exposure Effect, Framing, and Uncertainty Principle.
1 Seminal works on the expectation effecl
include The Human Problems of an Industrial
Civilization by Elton Mayo, Macmillan. 1933;
"The Effect of Expenmenler Bias on the
Performance of the Albino Rat ~ by Robert
Rosenthal and Kermit Fooe, Behavioral
SCience, 1963. voL 8, p. 115-118; ~Teachers'
ExpectanCies: Determinants 01 Pupils· 10
Gains
u by Roberl Rosenthal and Lenore
Jacobson. Psychological Reports, \/01. 19, p.
115-118. For a nice review of the placebo
effect. see The Placebo Effect: An
Interdisciplinary Exploration edited by Anne
Harrington, Harvard University Press. 1999.
!II
"1 '1
"1
WI
The expectation effect can Influence
perception and bel1avlor, but the
cll anges are temporary For example.
Ihe marker along Ule tune axrs rndr·
cales Ihe painl at whrch an expecla·
Iton was set. A change III performance
may be observed as a result (e.g ..
increased productiVity) but usually
reverts back to baseline.
!
'I
' II' " 1'''1'' r
till
g
m
E
{! - -
-
,r
Time
'T.AnMO."
AND BEST LINIMENT KNOWN r OR PAIN AND LAMENESS
GOOD FOR UH AHD BEAST 11 Glm IMMEDIATE RELIEf
~~~I.m~
LINIMENT
A credible pr'esentation Will generate
an expectalron effect In about 30 per-
cent of any given audience. Keeping
the clalms and outcomes vague often
helps-a belieVing person is biased to
interpret ambiguous effects In accor-
dance Will, tl1eir expectaUons. Thrs
technique was used to sell snake oil
solutions, and is still widely used to
sell astrology, psychrc predrclrons. and
things such as rad drets.
FOR
RHEUMATISM
CONTRACTED CORDS
SORE THROAT
NEURALGIA
TOOTHACHE
BITES OF ANIMALS
SCIATICA
FROST BITES
SWELLINGS
LAME BACK
CHILL BLAINS
SPRAINS
LUMBAGO
BRUISES
ETC.
,I", ,111
11 ii, I Ii I
11111
1111111111 II ", ii,i ll i,i " H'
~
SAGITIARIUS
~
November 23-December 21
It's a favorable time for real estate, investments, and
moneymaking opportunities to be successful. Romance
could develop through social activities or short trips. Don't
expect new acquaintances to be completely honest about
themselves. Your lucky day this week will be Sunday.
ExpCC'l,!\lon Effecl 69


=== ENTRY: Exposu re Effect (pp 36-36) ===

Repeated exposure to stimuli for which people have neutral
feelings will increase the likeability of the stimuli.'
The exposure effect occurs when stimuli are repeatedly presented and, as a result,
are increasingly well liked and accepted. For example, the more a song or slogan is
repeated, the more popular it is likely to become, a phenomenon exploited by both
radio and television networks. The exposure effect applies only to stimuli that are
perceived as neutral or positive. Repeated exposures to an offending stimulus may
actually amplify the negative perception, rather than remedy it The exposure effect
is observed with music, paintings, drawings, images, people, and advertisements.'
The strongest exposure effects are seen with photographs, meaningful words,
names, and simple shapes; the sma11est effects are seen with icons, people, and
auditory stimuli. The exposure effect gradually weakens as the number of presen-
tations increases-probably due to ooredom. Complex and interesting stimuli tend
to amplify the effect, whereas simple and boring stimuli tend to weaken it. Inter-
estingly, the longer a stimulus is exposed, Ille weaker the exposure effect. The
strongest effect is achieved when eXp:JSures are so brief or subtle that they are
subliminal (not consciously processed), or when they are separated by a delay.l
Familiarity plays a primary role in aesthetic appeal and acceptance; people like
things more when frequently exposed to them. For example, the initial resistance
by many people to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was primarily caused by a lack
of familiarity with its minimalist, abstract design. Similar resistance was experi-
enced by Pablo Picasso with his Cubist works, Gustave Eiffel with the Eiffel Tower,
Frank Uoyd Wright with the Guggenheim Museum, and many others whose works
are today widely accepted as brilliant and beautiful. As the level of exposure to
these works increased with time, familiarity with the works also increased and
resulted in greater acceptance and popularity.
Use the exposure effect to strengthen advertising and marketing campaigns,
enhance the perceived credibility and aesthetic of designs, and generally improve
the way people think and feel about a message or product. Keep the exposures
brief, and separate them with periods of delay. The exposure effect will be strongest
for the first ten exposures; therefore, focus resources on early presentations for
maximum benefit. Expect and prepare for resistance to a design if it is significantly
different from the norm.
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Classical Conditioning, Cognitive Dissonance,
and Framing.
70 Universal PrinCiples of Deslsn
I Also known as mere exposure effect, repetl·
tion·validity effect, frequency-validity effect,
/rutll effect. and repetition effect.
J The seminal application 01 the exposure e'fect
was in early 2O"4:entury propaganda-see. for
example, Adolf Hiller .. A Chilling Tale of
Propaganda by Max Arthur and Joseph
Goebbels, Trident Press International, 1999.
The seminal empirical work 00 the exposure
elfect is "AtlJtudinal Effects of Mere Exposure~
by Robert Zajonc, Journal of Personality and
Socia' Ps_ Monogmphs, ,.". 9(2),
p. 1-27.
J See, tor example. "Exposure and Affect:
Overview and Meta-Analysis of Research,
1968-198r by Robert F. Bomstein.
PsycholqgciJlBulletin, 1989. vol. (106),
p. 265-289.
The eXjX)Swe effect has always been
a primary tool 01 propagandIsts.
Ubiquitous posItive depictions. sucll
as these of Vladimir Lenin, are com·
manly used to Increase the likeabllity
and support of political leaders. Similar
techniques are used In marketlng,
adverllsillg. and electoral call1pcl!gns.
CDBnCHBR BnaCTb
B MMnnMDH pa3 4EMDKPa'M~HE
CBMDM 4EMDKPB'M~ECKD ­
&YPJKYB3HDM PECnV&IIMHM
Exposure tHeel 71


=== ENTRY: Face-ism Ratio (pp 37-37) ===

Tile ratio of face to body in an image that influences the
way the person in the image is perceived. '
Images depicting a person with a high face-ism ratio-the face takes up most of
the image-focus attention on the person's intellectual and personality attributes.
Images depicting a person in a low face-ism ratio- the body takes up most of the
image- focus attention on the physical and sensual attributes of the person. The
face-ism ratio is calculated by dividing the distance from the top of Ihe head to the
bottom of the chin (head height) by the distance from the lop of the head 10 the
lowest visible part of the txxJy (total visible height). An image without a face would
have a face-ism ratio of 0.00, and an image with only a face would have a face-
ism ratio of 1.00. Irrespective of gender, people rate individuals in high face-ism
images as being more intelligent, dominant, and ambitious than individuals in IO'N
face-ism images.
The term face-ism originated from research on gender bias in the media, It was
found that images of men in magazines, movies, and other media have signifi·
canUy higher face·ism ratios than images of women. This appears true across
most cultures, and is thought to reflect gender-stereotypical beliefs regarding the
characteristics of men and women. While there is little consensus as to why this is
the case, it is likely the result of unconscious processes resulting from a mix of
biological and cultural factors. In one experiment, for example, male and female
college students were randomly assigned a task to draw either a man or a woman,
The students were told they would be evaluated on their drawing skills, and were
given no additional instructions. Both genders drew men with prominent and
detailed faces, and drew women with full bodies and minimally detailed faces.2
Consider face·ism in the representation of people in photographs and drawings.
When the design objective requires more thoughtful interpretations or associations,
use images with high face·ism ratios. When the design objective requires more
ornamental interpretations or associations, use images with low·face--ism ralios.
Note that the interpretations of the images will be the same irrespective of the sub-
ject's or viewer's gender.
See also Attractiveness Bias, Baby-Face Bias, Classical Conditioning, Framing,
and Waist-to-Hip Ratio.
72 Universal PHnclptcs ot DeSign
I The term face-ism is used by some
researchers to refer to the tendency of the
media to represent men in high face-ism
images, and 'NOmen in low face·ism imagcs-
also referred to as txxJy-ism,
~ The seminal 'NOI'k on face·ism is MFace-ism ~
by Dane Archer, Debra D. Kimes, and MIChael
Barrios, PsydJOlqfy Tooay, 1978, p. 65-66;
and -Face-ism: 5 StudIeS of Sex·Dlfferences in
Facial Prominence
R by Dane Archer, Bonita
lntani, Debra D. Kimes, and Michael Barnas,
Journal of Personality a/ld Social Psychology,
1983, vol. 45. p. 725-735.


=== ENTRY: Factor of Safety (pp 38-38) ===

The use or more elements than is thought to be necessary
to offset the effects of unknown variables and prevent sys-
tem failure. I
Design requires dealing with unknQINns. No matter how knowledgeable the designer
and how thoroughly researched the design specification, basic assumptions about
unknowns of one kind or another are Inevitable in every design process. Factors of
safety are used to offset the potential effects of these unknowns. This is achieved
by adding materials and components to the system in order for its construction to
exceed the specification originally believed necessary. For eX8mple, designing an
Internet service that can support one thousand users is straightforward. However,
to account for unanticipated uses of the service (e.g., downloading large files), the
design specification can be multiplied by a safety factar (e.g., three). In this case,
a safety factor of three would mean that the selVice would be rated to support one
thausand users, but actually designed to support three times that many.
The size of the needed safety factor in a design corresponds directly to the level
of ignorance of the design parameters required-the greater the ignorance, the
greater the safety factor. For example, structures that are well understood and made
of materials of consistent quality, such as steel and concrete structures, typically
use a safety factor ranging from two to four. Structures that are well understood
and made of materials of varying quality, such as wood, may use a safety factor
ranging from four to eight. When ignorance is combined with materials of varying
quality. the safety factor can get quite large. For example, the designers of the
Great Pyramid at Giza unknowingly applied a safety factor of over twenty.2
Increasing the safety factor in a design translates into the addition of elements
(e.g., materials) in its construction. More elements mean more cost. New designs
must typically have large factors of safety because the number of unknowns is great.
If a design performs reliably over time, confidence that the unknowns In the system
have been managed combines with the pressure to reduce costs, and typically leads
to a "tuning" process to reduce elements and lower the safety factor. Unfortunately,
this process usually continues until an accident or failure occurs, at which point
cost considerations become secondary and safety factors are again increase<P
Use safety factors to minimize the probability of failure in a design. Apply them in
projXlrtion to the ignorance of the design parameters and the severity of the conse-
quences of failure. Reduce safety factors with caution. especially when specifica·
tions extend beyond design precedents. Except in cases of emergency. observe the
rated capacity of a system, and not the designed capacity (i.e., capacity including
factors of safety), when making decisions that may stress system limits.
See also Errors, Mooularity, Structural Forms, and Weakest Link.
74 Urllversat Princlptc~ of Ot:srgn
1 Also known as factor of ignorance.
, Note that dilferenl elements Within a system
can observe different faders of safety. For
example. a wing on an aircraft may apply a
factor of safety that is much greater Ulan the
factor of safely apphed to less CritICal elements.
J See. for example, To Engineer Is Human:
The Role of Fallute in Successful Deslgn.
Macmillan, 1985; and DesIgn Paradigms: Case
Histories of E(rot and Judgment {n
Engineering, cambridge University Press,
1994. both by Henry Petroski,
Tile O-flng design of tile space shutlle
Cilallengers solid rocket booster was
designed ta have a safety factor of
three. However, low ternperature..<; con-
tributed to the erosion of O-rings In
past launches and, consequently, to
the erOSion of this safety factor; at low
3
•
i!:-
.S!
"'.
'"
•
<f)
•
'0 2
o
10
~
1981
1982
1983
temperatures, the safely factor was
well below three. On the morning of
January 28, 1986, the temperature at
tile launcll pad was 36 degrees F (2.2
degrees C)- the lowest launch tem-
perature to date. Despite Ihe obJec-
tions of several engineers, the decision
100
• .....
80
•• •
'"
•
•
'"
• •
0
0
0
60
40
20
1984
1985
1986
'"
3
1il
OJ
C-
<il
0
.:9
to proceed With the launch was based
largely on the belief that the safety
factor was sufficient to offset any low-
temperature risks. Catastrophic failure
occurred shortly arter launch.
•
No O-ring damage
~ Minor O-ring damage
0
Major O-ring damage
Shuttle Launches
Rubber O-rings, about 38 feet (I 1.6 meters)
in circumference and Y. inch (0.635 cm) thick.
Factor of Sdfely 75


=== ENTRY: Feedback Loop (pp 39-39) ===

A relationship between variables in a system where the
consequences of an event feed back into the system as
input, modifying the event in the future.
Every action creates an equal and opposite reaction. When reactions loop back to
affect themselves, a feedback loop is created. All real-world systems are compose of
many such interacting feedback loops-animals, machines, businesses, and ecosys-
tems, to name a few. There are two types of feedback toops, positive and negative.
Positive feedback amplifies system output, resulting in growth or decline. Negative
feedback dampens output, stabitizing the system around an equilibrium point. I
Positive feedback loops are effective for creating change, but generally result in
negative consecuences if not moderated by negative feedback loops. For example,
in res!X)nse to head and neck injuries in football in the 19505, designers created
plastic football helmets with internal padding to replace leather helmets. The hel·
mets provided more protection, but induced players to take increasingly greater
risks when tackling. More head and neck injuries occurred than before. By con-
centrating on the problem in isolation (e.g., not considering changes in player
behavior) designers inadvertently created a positive feedback loop in which players
used their head and neck in increasingly risky ways. This resulted in more injuries,
which resulted in additional redesigns that made the helmet shells harder and
more padded, and so on:'
Negative feedback loops are effective for resisting change. For example, the
Segway Human Transporter uses negative feedback loops to maintain equilibrium.
As a rider leans forward or backward, the Segway accelerates or decelerates to
keep the system in equilibrium. To achieve this smoothly, the Segway makes one
hundred adjustments every second. Given the high adjustment rate, the oscilla-
tions around the point of equilibrium are so small as to not be detectable.
However, if fe'Ner adjustments were made per second, the oscillations would
increase in size and the ride lNGuld become increasingly jerky.
A key lesson of feedback loops is that things are connected-changing one vari-
able in a system will affect other variables in that system and other systems. This
is important because it means that designers must not only consider particular
elements of a design, but also their relation to the deSign as a whole and the
greater environment. Consider positive feedback loops to perturb systems to
change, but include negative feedback loops to prevent runaway behaviors that
lead to system failure. Consider negative feedback loops to stabilize systems, but
be cautious in that too much negative feedback in a system can lead to stagnation.'
See also Convergence, Errors, and Shaping.
76 Urllvelsal Prlflt'lpJes of DeSign
I In terms of practical applicaUon. the seminal
works on systems and feedback loops lm:lude
Industrial Dynamics, MIT Press, 1961:
Urban Dynamics, MtT Press, 1969; and
World DynamICS, MIT Press, 1970, by
Jay W. Forrester
• See. lor example, Why Things BIle Back:
Technology and rhe Revenge of Unintended
Consequences by Edward Tenner. Vintage
Books, 1937_
~ See. fOf example, Macroscope: A New World
ScientifIC System by Joel De Rosnay, trans-
lated by Robert Edwards, Harper & Row
Publishers, 1979.
Positive Feedback Loop
lime
The design 111story of the football hel-
met IS a classic example of positive
feedback. Positive feedback loops Will
eventually collapse, or tapel to an
Negative Feedback Loop
Time
/
I
Negative feedback loops are used 10
stabilize systems
in thiS r:ac;e, tu bal-
ance the Segway and Its rider. Negative
feedback loops are apphed Similarly In
tllennostalJr. systems and Oy-by-
Hardness of Helmet
+
InjUry~isk-taking
S-shaped curve If limlled by some
othel factor, such as new rules penal·
IZlng Ihe use of helmets In tackhng.
Angle of Segway
wile controls In alrclaft. Negative
feedback loops assume a goal state,
Of O::;CIUate around a goal state if there
are delays betw.:.-'en the vanables In
the loop.
+
-
Velocity
Feedb~f:k LoOp 77


=== ENTRY: Fibonacci Sequence (pp 40-40) ===

A sequence of numbers in which each number is the SUIll
of the preceding two.
A Fibonacci sequence is a sequence of numbers in which each number is the
sum af the two preceding numbers (e.g., 1, 1,2,3,5,8, 13). Patterns exhibiting
the sequence are commonly found in natural forms, such as the petals of flowers,
spirals of galaxies, and bones in the human hand. The ubiquity of the sequence in
nature has led many to conclude that patterns based on the Fibonacci sequence
are intrinsically aesthetic and, therefore, worthy of consideration in design. I
Fibonacci patterns are found in many classic works, including classic poetry, art,
music, and architecture. For example, it has been argued that Virgil used Fibonacci
sequences to structure the poetry in the Aeneid. Fibonacci sequences are found in
the musical compositions of Mozart's sonatas and Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. Le
Corbusier meshed key measures of the human body and Fibonacci sequences to
develop the Modulor, a classic system of architectural proportions and measure-
ments to aid designers in achieving practical and harmonious designs.2
Fibonacci sequences are generally used in concert with the golden ratio, a prin-
ciple to which it is closely related. For example, the division of any two adjacent
numbers in a Fibonacci sequence yields an approximation of the golden ratio.
Approximations are rough for early numbers in the sequence but increasingly
accurate as the sequence progresses. As with the golden ratio, debate continues
as to the aesthetic value of Fibonacci patterns. Are such patterns considered
aesthetic because people find them to be more aesthetic or because people have
been taught to believe they are aesthetic? Research on the aesthetics of the
golden ratio tends to favor the former, but little empirical research exists on the
aesthetics of non-golden Fibonacci patterns.3
The Fibonacci sequence continues to be one of the most influential patterns in
mathematics and design. Consider Fibonacci sequences when developing interest-
ing compositions, geometric patterns, and organic motifs and contexts, especially
when they involve rhythms and harmonies among multi ple elements. 00 not
contrive designs to incorporate Fibonacci sequences, but also do not forego oppor-
tunities to explore Fibonacci relationships when other aspects of the design are
not compromised.
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Golden Ratio, and Most Average Facial
Appearance Effect.
78 Universal PrinCiples of Design
, The seminal work on the Fibonacci sequence
is Uber Abaci [Book of the Abacus] by
Leonardo of Pisa, 1202. Contemporary seminal
works include The Geometry of Art and Life by
Matila Ghyka, Dover Publications, 1978
[19461; Elements of Dynamic Symmetry by Jay
Hambidge. Dover Publications, 1978 [1920J.
, See, for example, Structural Patterns and
Proportions in Virgil's Aeneid by George Eckel
Duckworth, University of Michigan Press,
1952; and "Did Mozart Use the Golden
Section?" by Mike May, American Scientist,
March-April 1996; and Le Modular by Le
Corbusier, Birkhauser, 2CXX) [19481.
l "All That Glitters: A Review of Psychological
Research on the Aesthetics of the Golden
Section" by Christopher D. Green, Perception,
1995, vol. 24, p. 937-968.


=== ENTRY: Figure-Ground Relationship (pp 41-41) ===

Elements are perceived as either figures (objects of focus)
or ground (the rest of the perceptual field),
The figure-ground relationship is one of several principles referred to as Gestalt
principles of perception. It asserts that the human perceptual system separates
stimuli into either figure elements or ground elements. Figure elements are the
objects of focus, and ground elements compose an undifferentiated background.
This relationship can be demonstrated with both visual stimuli, such as photographs,
and auditory stimuli, such as soundtracks with dialog and background music.
When the figure and ground of a composition are clear, the relationship is stable;
the figure element receives more attention and is better remembered than the
ground. In unstable figure-ground relationships, the relationship is ambiguous
and can be interpreted in different ways; the interpretation of elements alternates
between figure and ground.
The visual cues that determine which elements will be perceived as figure and
which as ground are:
• The figure has a definite shape, whereas the ground is shapeless.
• The ground continues behind the figure.
• The figure seems closer with a clear location in space, whereas the ground
seems farther away and has no clear location in space.
• Elements below a horizon line are more likely to be perceived as figures,
whereas elements above a horizon line are more likely to be perceived
as ground.
• Elements in the lower regions of a design are more likely to be perceived
as figures, whereas elements in the upper regions are more likely to be
perceived as ground?
Clearly differentiate between figure and ground in order to focus attention and mini-
mize perceptual confusion. Ensure that designs have stable figure-ground relation-
sh ips by incorporating the appropriate visual cues listed above. Increase the proba-
bility of recall of key elements by making them figures in the composition.
See also Gutenberg Principle, Law of Pragnanz, and Top-Down Lighting Bias.
80 Universal Principles of Design
I The seminal work on the figure-ground relation-
ship is "Synoplevede Figurer" [Figure and
Ground] by Edgar Rubin, Gyldendalske, 1915,
translated and reprinted in Readings in Percep-
tion by David C. Beardslee and Michael Werth-
eimer, D. Van Nostrand, 1958, p. 194- 203.
! "Lower Region: A New Cue for Figure-Ground
Assignment" by Shaun P. Vecera, Edward K.
Vogel, and Geoffrey F. Woodman, Journal or
Experimental Psychology: General, 2002, vol.
131(2), p. 194-205.
The Hubul vase is unstable because
il can be perceived as a whIte vase
on a black background or two black
faces lool<!!lg at each olher on a
white background.
Initially, there is no stable figul"e-
ground relatIonshIp in this irnage.
However. after a mornent, the
Dalmatian pops out and tile ligure-
ground relationship stabilizes.
Placing Ihe logo ilt tile bottom of the
page makes it a figure element-it will
receive more attention and will be bet-
ter rernernbered Ihan the logo at the
top of Ihe page.
Placing the spa name below the hori-
zon line in the logo makes It a figure
element-it will receive more attention
and be better remembered Ihan the
design that places the name at the top
01 tile logo.
fI ~, r JNA
~t(~~l--_
Figure-Ground Relationship 81


=== ENTRY: Fitts' Law (pp 42-42) ===

Tile time required to move to a target is a function of tile
target size ancl distance to the targel.
According to Fitts' Law, the smaller and more distant a target, the longer it will take
to move to a resting position over the target. In addition, the faster the required
movement and tile smaller the target, the greater the error rate due to a speed-
accuracy tradeoff. Fitts' law has implications for the design of controls, control lay-
outs, and any device that facilitates movement to a targeL 1
Fitts' Law is applicable only for rapid, pointing movements, not for more continu-
ous movements, such as writing or drawing. It has been used to predict efficiency
of movement for assembly work performed under a microscope, as weI! as move-
ment of a foot to a car pedal. Pointing movements typically consist of one large,
quick movement toward a target (ballistic movement), followed by fine-adjustment
movements (homing movements) to a resting position over (acquiring) the target.
Homing movements are generally responsible for most of the movement time and
cause mast errorS.2
Designers can decrease errors and improve usability by understanding the impli-
cations of Fitts' Law. For example, when painting to an object on a computer
screen, movement in the vertical or horizontal dimensions can be constrained,
which dramatically increases the speed with which objects can be accurately
acquired. This kind of constraint is commonly applied to controls such as scroll
bars, but less commonly to the edges of the screen, which also acl as a barrier to
cursor movement; positioning a button along a screen edge or in a screen corner
significantly reduces the homing movements required, resulting in fewer errors
and faster acquisitions.
Consider Fitts' Law when designing systems that involve pointing. Make sure that
controls are near or large, particularly when rapid movements are required and
accuracy is important. ukewise, make controls more distant and smaller when
they should not be frequently used, or when they will cause problems if acciden-
tally activated. Consider strategies that constrain movements when possible to
improve performance and reduce error.
See also Constraint, Errors, and Hick's Law.
82 Untvp.I ,II PrinC iple'} 01 Deo;lgrl
I The semmal work OIl Filts' law is ~The
Information Capacity of the Human Molar
System in Controlling Amplitude of Movemcnt~
by Paul M. Fills, Journal of Experimental
Psychology. 1954. vol. 4. p. 381- 191. The
Fitts' law equatIOn IS MT:::- a + b log' (dis + 1).
where MT =- movement time 10 a target;
a ::: 0.230 sec: b = 0.166 sec; d = distance
between pointing device and target; and 5 =-
size of the target. For example, assume the
distance belween the center of a screen and
an icon of 1· (3 em) diameter IS 6" (15 cm).
The time to acquire the icon would be MT::
0.230 sec + 0.166 sec (logl (&'1 + I» =- 0.7 sec.
See "Human Performance Timp.$ in
Microscope Work" by Gary Langolf and Walton
M. Hancock, AilE Transactions. 1975, vol.
7(2). p. 110 117; and MApplication of Fitts'
law 10 FOOl-Pedal Design" by Colin G. Drury,
Human Factors. 1975. vol. 17(4). p.368-373.
file
Edit
tl
fold..
View
Window
~ .
Help
Empty Trash
Restor!
Shut Down
s~
~ folder
~
The time required to
acquire the closer, smaller
folder IS the same as ror
the distant, larger folder.
Steering
Wheel
Centerline
Brake
Distance from
steering wheel
centerline to right
edge of brake pedal
13
0000
The Maclnlosll user interiace
makes it easy to move to a
resllng place over menus on
the screen edge. The screen
edge stops the cursor, effec-
tively making the menus big-
ger by gIving them infinite
heigllL
~ Help
New Folder
v;~
Clean Up
Arrange
View Options ..
Accelerator
4
Jeep Cherokee
Transmission
Hump
Jeep Cherokee Floorboard
Ford Taurus Floorboard
The Microsoft Windows user interface
presents pop-up menus when you
press the right mouse button. Since
the distance between the cursor posi-
lion and the pop-up menu is minimal,
menu items are quickly acquired.
In the 1990s, many cases 01 unin-
tended acceleration were reported In
Chl)'Sler Jeep Cllerokees. Brake ped-
als are usually 10000led to tile right of
the steering wheel centerline, as tn
the Ford Taurus. However, tile Jeep
Cherokee's large transmission hump
forced the pedal positions 10 the lefl.
This Increased the dIstance between
foot and brake pedal, making the latter
more difficult to reaell. This, combined
with a violatIon of convention, caused
Jeep Cherokee drivers to press the
acceteratOJ when they intended .to
press the brake pedal.
FillS' law 83


=== ENTRY: Five Hat Racks (pp 43-44) ===

There are rive ways to organize Information: category, time,
location, alphabet, and continuum.'
The organization of information is one of the most powerful factors influencing the
way people think about and interact with a design. The five hat racks prinCiple
asserts that there are a limited number of organizational strategies, regardless of
the specific application: category, time, location, alphabet, and continuum.2
Category refers to organization by similarity or relatedness. Examples include areas
of study in a college catalog, and types of retail merchandise on a Web site.
Organize information by category when clusters of similarity exist within the informa·
tion, or when people will naturally seek out information by category (e.g., a person
desiring to purchase a stereo may seek a category for electronic appliances).
Time refers to organization by chronological sequence. Examples include historical
timelines and TV Guide schedules. Organize information by time when presenting
and comparing events over fixed durations, or when a time-based sequence is
involved (e.g., a step-by·step procedure).
Location refers to organization by geographical or spatial reference. Examples
include emergency exit maps and travel guides. Organize information by location
when orientation and wayfinding are important or when information is meaning-
fully related to the geography of a place (e.g., an historic site).
Alphabet refers to organization by alphabetical sequence. Examples Include dic-
tionaries and encyclopedias. Organize information alphabetically when information
is referential, when efficient nonlinear access to specific items is required, or when
no other organizing strategy is appropriate.
Continuum refers to organizalion by magnitude (e.g., lowest to highest, worst to
best). Examples include baseball batting averages and Internet search engine
results. Organize information by continuum when comparing things using a
common measure.
See also Advance Organizer, Consistency, and Framing.
I The term hat racks is built on an analogy-
hats as information and racks as tlle ways 10
organize inlormation. Also known as five WaYS
of organizing information.
, The seminal work on the five hal racks IS
Information Anxletj by RIChard Saul Wurman,
Bantam Books, 199:). Note thai Wurman
changed the hat rack title of contmuum to
hterarchy in a later edition of the book, which
permits the acronym LATCH. The origtnal trlle
continuum IS presented here, as the authors
believe it to be a lTlOfe accurate descripbon of
the category.
The live hal racks are applied here
to the tallest structures in the world
Althougll tile ~J me Information IS
presented In each case, the different
organizations dramatically Influence
which aspects of tile informatron
are emphaSized.
Alphabetical
j ~ 111 j ~I til
Canadian
Cllic
Jln MilO
Menilra
Orit!fllal
OslanklnO Pctron,1S
Scars
lianJin
World
NahonOlI
PIOlza
Building
Kuala
Pcarl
Tower
Towers
Tower
TV
Trade
T""",
Lumpur
Towe,
T""",
Cenle!
Time
j II I j t 1
~ i ~ I
1967
1973
WOOd
T"'"
Cenler
1974
1975
1991
1995
1996
1996
1998
1999
<htankmo
T"""
canadian
Na\JonaI
T""",
"'<
p,,,,
M""~
K ....
lumpur
PelrllOilS
Towers
Jln Mao
Bwkhng
Location
• i
1." .
II
Oslankfl)O
T0'M3fS
$ears
Tower
Menara
Jln Milo
Tower
Canadian
Kuala
BuildIng
NalJOOal
World
Trade
Centcr
lumpul
Cilic:
Tower
"""
1283'
1362'
1368'
1381"
1403'
ClIIC
T1anJln
Wo<k1
Jln Mao
M ... rn
Plala
TV
T_
Buikfing ""'.
T ... ,
Cenl"
lumpur
category
canadlCln
Meoara
Oriental
Oslankino
Ttanjin
Nahonal
Kuala
Pearl
Tower
TV
Tower
lumpur
Tower
Tower
1450'
s..~
Towe,
1483' 1535'
Pctronas
Docnlal
T ... "
Pearl ,-
Jln MOIO Pmrooas
BUlldlna
Towers
1762'
O!.tan~lno
T_
s.."
T ... ,
1815'
canadian
NatlOrnl
T_
Flexi bi I ity-U sabi I ity Tradeoff
As the flexibility of a system increases, its usability
decreases.
The flexibility-usability tradeoff is exemplified in the well-known maxim, jack of all
trades, master of none. Flexible designs can perform more functions than special-
Ized designs, but they perform the functions less efficiently. Flexible designs are, by
definition, more complex than inflexible designs, and as a result are generally more
difficult to use. For example, a Swiss Army Knife has many attached tools that increase
its flexibility. These tools are less usable and efficient than corresponding individual
tools, but taken together provide a flexibility of use not available from any single tool.
The flexibility-usability tradeoff exists because accommodating flexibility entails satis-
fying a larger set of design requirements, which invariably means not only more
compromises, but also more complexity in the design, L
It is a common design mistake to assume that designs should always be made as
flexible as possible. In reality, h<JNever. flexibility has costs in terms of decreased effi-
ciency, added complexity, increased time, and money for development. Flexibility gen-
erally pays dividends only when an audience cannot clearly anticipate its future
needs. For example, personal computers are flexible devices that are difficult to use,
relative to more specialized devices like video game players. However, the primary
value of a personal computer is strength as a multipurpose device that can be used
In many different ways: word processing, lax preparation, e-mail. People purchase
video game players to play games, but they purchase personal computers to satisfy
a variety of needs, many of which are unknown at the time of purchase.
The ability of an audience to anticipate future uses of a product is a key indicator of
how they will value flexibility versus usability in design. When an audience can clearly
anticipate its needs, specialized designs that target those needs will be more success-
ful. When an audience cannot clearly define its needs, more flexible designs thai
enable people to address future contingencies will be more successful. The degree
to which an audience can or cannot define future needs should correspond to the
degree of specialization or flexibility in the design, As an audience comes to under-
stand the range of possible needs that can be satisfied, their needs become better
defined and, consequently, the designs need to become more specialized. This shift
from flexibility toward specialization over time is a general pattern observed in the
evolution of all systems, and should be considered in the life cycle of products.
The tradeoff between flexibilty and usability has implications for weighing the relative
importance of flexibility versus usability in a design, When an audience has a clear
understanding of its needs, favor specialized designs that target those needs as effi-
ciently as lX>SSible. When an audience has a poor understanding of its needs, favor
flexible designs to address the broadest possible set of future applications. When
designing multiple generations of products, consider a general shift toward special-
ization as audience needs become more defined.
See also 80/20 Rule, Convergence, Hierarchy of Needs, Life Cycle, Modularity, and
Progressive Disclosure.
86 UOlvelsal Pnnr:lples 01 Design
1 See, for example, The InviSIble Computer by
Donald A. Norman. MIT Press, 1999; and
"The Visible Problems of the Invisible
Computer: A Skeptical Look at Information
Apphances~ by Andrew Odlyzko. First Monday,
1999, vol. 4 (9). http://www.firslmonday.org.


=== ENTRY: Forgiveness (pp 45-45) ===

Designs should help people avoid errors and minimize the
negative consequences of errors when they do occur,
Human error is inevitable, but it need not be catastrophic. Forgiveness in design
helps prevent errors before they occur, and minimizes the negative consequences
of errors when they do occur. Forgiving designs provide a sense of security and
stability, which in turn, fosters a willingness to learn, explore, and use the design.
Common strategies for incorporating forgiveness in designs include:
Good Affordances-
physical characteristics of the design that influence its correct
use (e.g., uniquely shaped plug that can only be inserted into the appropriate
receptacle).
ReversibJJity of Actions-
one or more actions can be reversed if an error occurs or
the intent of the person changes (e.g., undo function in software).
Safety Nets - device or process that minimizes the negative consequences of a
catastrophic error or failure (e.g., pilot ejection seat in aircraft).
Confirmation-
verification of intent that is required before critical actions are
allowed (e.g., lock that must be opened before equipment can be activated).
Warnings-
signs, prompts, or alarms used to warn of imminent danger (e.g., road
signs warning of a sharp turn ahead).
Help- information that assists in basic operations, troubleshooting, and error
recovery (e.g., documentation or help line).
The preferred methods of achieving forgiveness in a design are affordances,
reversibility of actions, and safety nets. Designs that effectively use these strategies
require minimal confirmations, warnings, and help- i.e., if the affordances are good,
help is less necessary; if actions are reversible, confirmations are less necessary;
if safety nets are strong, warnings are less necessary. When using confirmations,
warnings, and help systems, avoid cryptic messages or icons. Ensure that mes-
sages clearly state the risk or problem, and also what actions can or should be
taken. Keep in mind that too many confirmations or warnings impede the flow
of interaction and increase the likelihood that the confirmation or warning will
be ignored.
Create forgiving designs by using good affordances, reversibility of actions, and
safety nets. If this is not possible, be sure to include confirmations, warnings, and
a good help system. Be aware that the amount of help necessary to successfully
interact with a design is inversely proportional to the quality of the design- if a lot
of help is required, the design is poor.
See also Affordance, Confirmation, Errors, and Factor of Safety.
88 Universal PrinCiples 01 Design
25
mph
Road signs make roads more
forgiving by warning drivers of
impending hazards.
Locking and tagging equipment is a
common confirmation strategy to
ensure that people do not accidentally
engage systems under repair.
The good affordance of this plug
prevents it from being inserted into
the socket impl·operly.
The Adobe Photoshop History palette
enables users to flexibly undo and
redo tllelr previous actions.
In case of a catastrophic failure, tile
ballistic recovery system acts as a
safety net, enabling the pilot and craft
to return safely to eartll.
•
' IJ"'
Histo ry
i:;;, ~
I
§'I
I
~
I
§l
I
§l
I
I
~I
I
§'I
I
~
I
§ -
I
If' -,
I
§j
I
~
I
Iill
I
~
I
§<
I
@'l
."
Ac~on'
Tool P",",I, "-
•
pod··ipg
0,.,
Image Size
8righlrn..s/Conlro.t
CMYKCoIor
Imllge Sin
s..!..t:1 C"n..a'
'm~
Strole
NBw 10)",'
Nn,y/<-'Y'''
SA<-<I(clnV<1l
Fm
o..scll:<:1
5"1<,<1(",,,,,,,
(uIPi.d.
P"II['
£
Y
lEI
[<iJ
TIl
•
•
Forgiveness 89


=== ENTRY: Form Follows Function (pp 46-46) ===

Beauty in design results from purity of function.
The form follows function axiom is interpreted in one of two ways- as a descrip-
tion of beauty or a prescription for beauty. The descriptive interpretation is that
beauty results from purity of function and the absence of ornamentation. The pre-
scriptive interpretation is that aesthetic considerations in design should be second-
ary to functional considerations. The axiom was adopted and popularized by mod-
ernist architects in the early 20th century, and has since been adopted by design-
ers in a variety of disciplines.1
The descriptive interpretation-Le., that beauty results from purity of function-
was originally based on the belief that form follows function in nature. In reality,
however, it is quite the opposite- function follows form in nature, if it follows
anything at all. (Evolution by natural selection transmits no intention from one
generation to the next; genetic patterns are simply passed on and it is left to each
organism to find use of the form that it has inherited.) Nonetheless, functional
aspects of a design are less subjective than purely aesthetic aspects and, there-
fore functional criteria present a clearer and more objective criteria for judgement
of quality. The result is designs that are more timeless and enduring, but also
frequently perceived by general audiences as simple and uninteresting.2
The prescriptive interpretation-
i.e., that aesthetic considerations in design should
be secondary to functional considerations- was likely derived from the descriptive
interpretation. The use of form follows function as a prescription or design guideline
is problematic in that it focuses the designer an the wrong question. The question
should not be, "What aspects of form should be omitted or traded for function?" but
rather, "What aspects of the design are critical to success?" These success criteria,
not a blind allegiance to form or function, should drive design specifications and
decisions. When time and resources are limited, design tradeoffs should be based
on what does the least harm to the probability of success, however success is
defined. In certain circumstances, primary aesthetic considerations will be sacri-
ficed, and in others, primarily functional ones will be
Use the descriptive interpretation of form follows function as an aesthetic guide,
but do not apply the prescriptive interpretation as a strict design rule. When mak-
ing design decisions, focus on the relative importance of all aspects of the
design-form and function-in light of the success criteria.
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Exposure Effect, and Ockham's Razor.
90 Universal Principl es of Design
I The origin of the concept is attributed to the
18'" century Jesuit monk Carlo lodoli. His the-
ories on architectun;! likely influenced later
designers like Horatio Greenough and louis
Sullivan who then articulated the concept in
popular form. The seminal works on form fol-
lows function are "The Tall Office Building
Artistically Considered" by Louis H. Sullivan.
Uppincoll's Magazine, March 1896; and Form
Follows Fiasco: Why Modem Architecture
Hasn't Worked by Peter Blake, little. Brown,
and Company, 1977.
l The tendency of general audiences to resist
the new is a function of their fam iliarity with
the old. It often takes several generations to
erode population biases sufficiently such that
the merits of a new design can be objectively
considered
Defining success criteria is essential to
good design. For example, if the suc-
cess criteria for a watch are defined in
terms of speed and accuracy, the digi-
ta l display is superior. If the success
criteria are defined in ternlS of pure
aesthetics, the minimalist analog dis-
play is superior (the pure function of
the digital display has not yet tmns-
lated to a popular aesthetic for general
audiences). In all cases, 1I1e success
criteria should direct design decisions
and trade-afts, and should be the p"i-
mary conSideration in deterrnining the
specifications for a design.
Function------------------------------ Form
Perhaps no purer functional form
exists than tile original Humvee. Born
out of military specifications, the
success of the Humvee in combat
led to the commercial successors-
Hummer H 1 and H2. Each represents
a unique and com pelling aesthetiC
that results from purity of function
and minimal ornamentation.
j· orm Follows Function 91


=== ENTRY: Framing (pp 47-48) ===

A technique that influences decision making and judgment
by manipulating the way information is presented.
Framing is the use of images, words, and context to manipulate how people think
about something. Information can be presented in such a way as to emphasize
the positive (e.g., glass IS half-fum or the negative (e.g., glass is half-empty). The
type of frame used to present information dramatically affects how people make
decisions and judgments, and is consequently a powerful influencer of behavior.
News media, politicians, propagandists, and advertisers all commonly use framing
(knowingly or unknowingly) with great effect. '
In October 2002, Russian Special Forces used a sedating gas to knock out
Chechen rebels who were holding over 750 hostages captive in the Moscow
Theater. The gas prevented the rebels from setting off explosives and killing all of
the hostages, but the gas itself caused the death of well over 100 hostages.
Newspapers throughout the world reported the incident in basically one of two
ways: Gas Kiffs Over 100 Hostages, or Gas Saves Over 500 Hostages. This event is
tragic no matter how it is presented, but judgment of the Russian efforts to free
the hostages is greatly influenced by the frame of its presentation. The negative
frame emphasizes the lives lost, and presents the information in a way that sug-
gests the Russians bungled the affair. The positive frame emphasizes the lives
saved, and presents the information in a way that suggests the Russians cleverly
salvaged a seemingly intractable situation. Similar positive and negative frames are
typically used in advertising. For example, it is common to see yogurt advertised as
95 percent fat free, rather than 5 percent fat rich; and tobacco legislation has
been defeated more than once by framing the legislation as a matter of taxation,
instead of a matter of public health.
Positive frames tend to elicit positive feelings, and result in proactive and risk-
seeking behaviors. Negative frames tend to elicit negative feelings, resulting in
reactive and risk-avoiding behaviors. Stress and time pressures amplify these
behaviors, a phenomenon frequently exploited in high pressure sales: present a
product in a positive frame, present competitors in a negative frame, and time-
bound the decision to pressure the buy. However, when people are exposed to
multiple conflicting frames, the framing effect is neutralized, and people think and
act consistently with their own beliefs.
Use framing to elicit positive or negative feelings about a design, and to influence
behaviors and decision-making. Use positive frames to move people to action
(e.g., make a purchase) and negative frames to move people to inaction (e.g.,
prevent use of illegal drugs). To maintain a strong framing effect, make sure that
frames are not conflicting. Conversely, neutralize framing effects by presenting
multiple conflicting frames.
See also Expectation Effect and Exposure Effect.
92 UniverSill Principles of Design
, The seminal work on framing is uThe Framing
of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice" by
Amos Twrsky and Daniel Kahneman, Science,
1981, vol. 211, p. 453--458. A nice treatment
of the subject is The Psychology of Judgment
and Decisiun Making by Scott Pious. McGraw-
Hill. 1993.
1"( ~IQ"OIi TRA'FIC I. A M[NAC( TO OHIO
AND 'H[ HA"O'" llllT" IN nM[ OFWAR AHD
P£ACIt.
AllO~" H IT "'OW .0."10 fOR IEYER
Vote YES for Prohibition
On November 5111
IHi O~ ID nAY flO£IIAHOI
I. I. 'fl1mr.MUI("
Will You Bac
Or back
Booze
"Yes" for
Prohibition
N(I .... Sih.
TK1 moo ~y f UlU A'TlON
~ ... w..trt.._
Me-
Ga rbage I n-Ga rbage Out
The quality of system output is dependent on the quality
of system input'
The garbage in-garbage out principle is based on the experience of early com·
puter scientists who quickly learned that good inputs yield good results, and bad
inputs yield bad results-garbage in, garbage out. The rule has been generalized
over time to apply to all systems, and is commonly invoked in domains such as
business, education, nutrition, and engineering, to name a few, The garbage in
metaphor refers to one of two kinds of input problems: problems of type, and
problems of quality.'
Problems of type occur when the incorrect type of input is fed into a system,
such as entering a phone number into a credit card number field. Problems of type
are serious because the input provided CQuid be radically different from the input
expected. This can be advantageous in that problems of type are relatively easy to
detect, but problematic in that they represent the maximum form of garbage if
undetected. Problems of type are generally caused by a class of errors called mis-
takes-incorrect actions caused by conscious actions. The primary strategies for
minimizing problems of type are affordances and constraints. These strategies
structure input and minimize the frequency and magnitude of garbage input.
Problems of quality occur when the correct type of input is fed into a system,
but with defects, such as entering a phone number into a phone number field
but entering the wrong number. Depending on the frequency and severity of these
defects, problems of quality mayor may not be serious. Mistyping one letter in a
name may have minor consequences (e.g., search item not found); trying to request
a download of fifty records but typing five thousand might lock up the system.
Problems of quality are generally caused by a class of errors called slips~incor­
rect actions caused by unconscious, accidental actions. The primary strategies for
minimizing problems of quality are previews and confirmations. These strategies
allow the consequences of actions to be reviewed and verified prior to input.
The best way to avoid garbage out is to prevent garbage in. Use affordances and
constraints to minimize pmblems of type. Use previews and confirmations to mini-
mize problems of quality. When input integrity is critical, use validation tests to
check integrity prior to input, and consider confirmation steps that require the
independent verification of multiple people.
See also Errors, Feedback Loop, and Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
94 Universal PrinCiples of Deslsn
I Also known as GIGO.
1 The garbage in-garbage oul principle was first
used by researchers in computer science dur-
ing the 1950s.
Original Form
Order Form: Billing and Shipping Information
poge1012
Shipping Address:
I Nome
I Street Address
r Street Address
I City, State and Zip Code
Credit Card Information:
Billing Address:
II NN,;om:.:--------~O::=:.+-o Unconstrained fields
I
SI~eet Address
increase the probability of
garbage input.
r Street Address
r City, State and Zip Code
I Nome on Credit Card
rl "'Ty-pe- o'f C",-e""'di::-I C" o-,-'-
d I Credit Card Number
Exp. Date
Shipping Method:
Date to Ship:
,---'-----
I continue > > I
Redesigned Form
Order Form: Billing and Shippina Information
pog<!2oi"2
o .Iod. ............. """' ................ .."., r--"'-
Shipping Address:
Billing Address
o do-J,."-J-...odd. ... " .... _
... ~AdJr
...
[ Firsl Nome II Lml Name
[First Name
II Lasl Name
I Streel Add,ess
1 Street Address
I
I
I City
I Siale ~ Ilzip Cade
I City
I State ~ II Zip Code
Credit Card lnformatioE
I Nome on Cord
I Tle=. of Co,d
~ IIIII I Moolh ~ II Yeo, ~I
Ctodlc-i"""""'" --
Shipping Method:
Date to Ship:
I Standard Shipping $7.00
~
I
I Mooth
~ II Day ; II Yeo, ~I
I continue » I
y ....... atdor ..... <101 bo pIoced ~
1<'"
,..-i_m. ,nl<>rmalion)""> ........... ond
I
dic~ Iho -.ubm~ ord.,. bunon
MardI 21, 2003
, ....
........... <hop maIU...
Allow users to automate
input by accessing stored
information.
Constrain input when a
specific amount of
information is required.
Constrain input using
menus of options.
Slop",: _w ....
101 Mclin SIreoI
_n""",
.... ~
O>---------~O Allow users to preview
information before they
complete transactions .
Ncon:h 30. 2003
....
Kll,,",, Jchnoon
211 Elm lIvG.
c ..... ,_ OH 4A356
VISA:. "" ." ..... 3041
~. Do!. .5/2006
Nome an Cord. km. .... J.leI.""",
, rTII;Ike thonges r r iUbmil 0I'aet
These two different deSigns of the
same order form illustrate how
deSigners can influence the amount
of garbage entered into a system.
Garbage In-Garbage Out 95


=== ENTRY: Golden Ratio (pp 49-49) ===

A ratio within the elements of a form, sLich as height to
width, approximating 0.618 1
The golden ratio is the ratio between two segments such that the smaller (be) seg-
ment is to the larger segment (ab) as the larger segment (ab) is to the sum of the
two segments (ae), or bc/ab = ablac = 0.618.'
a
I
b
I
c
I
The golden ratio is found throughout nature, art, and architecture. Pinecones,
seashells, and the human body all exhibit the golden ratio. Piet Mondrian and
Leonardo da Vinci commonly incorporated the golden ratio into their paintings.
Stradivari utilized the golden ratio in the construction of his violins. The Parthenon,
the Great Pyramid of Giza, Stonehenge, and the Chartres Cathedral all exhibit the
golden ratio.
While many manifestations of the golden ratio in early art and architecture were
likely caused by processes not involving knowledge of the golden ratio, it may be
that these manifestations resu lt from a more fundamental, subconscious prefer-
ence for the aesthetic resulting from the ratio. A substantial body of research com~
paring individual preferences for rectangles of various proportions supports a pref-
erence based on the golden ratio. However, these findings have been challenged
on the theory that preferences for the ratio in past experiments resulted from
experimenter bias, methodological flaws, or other external factors.J
Whether the golden ratio taps into some inherent aesthetic preference or is simply
an early design technique turned tradition, there is no question as to its past and
continued influence on design. Consider the golden ratio when it is not at the
expense of other design objectives. Geometries of a design should not be con-
trived to create golden ratios, but golden ratios should be explored when other
aspects of the design are not compromised.4
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Form Follows Function, Rule of Thirds, and
Waist-to-Hip Ratio.
96 Univel·sal Principles ot Design
I Also known as golden mean, golden number,
golden section, go/den proportion, divine pro-
portion. and seclio aurea.
2 The golden ratio is irrational (never"ending
decimal) and can be computed with the equa-
tion (..J5-11/2. Adding 1 to the golden ratio
yields 1.618 ... , referred to as Phi ((jl). The val-
ues are used interchangeably to defi ne the
golden ratio, as they represent the same basic
geometriC relationship. Geometric shapes
derived from the golden ratio include golden
ellipses, golden rectangles, and golden triangles.
] The seminal work on the golden ratio is Ober
die Frage des Golden Schnitts [On the ques-
tion of the golden section] by Gustav T.
Fechner, Archiv li.ir die zeichnenden Kunste
I Archive for the Drawn/Graphic Arts], 1865,
vol. 11, p. 100-112. A contemporary reference
is "All That Glitters: A Review of Psychological
Research on the Aesthetics of the Golden
Section" by Christopher D. Green, Perception,
1995, vol. 24, p. 937-968. For a critical exami-
nation of the golden ratio thesis, see "The Cult
of the Golden Ration in Weird Water & Fuzzy
Logic by Martin Gardner, Prometheus Books,
1996, p. 90-96.
~ The page spread of this book approximates a
golden rectangle. The page height is 10 inches
(25 cm) and the page width is 8.5 inches (22
em). The total page-spread width (17 inches
[43 em]) divided by the page height yields a
ratio of 1.7.
In each example. the ralio between
the blue and red segments approxi-
mates the golden l·aUa. Note 110W the
ratio corresponds with a significant
feature or alteration of the forlll.
------------- - ~
I
II II
I
-I
0
E"xamples are the Palthenoll,
Strad ivarius Violin, Notre-Dame
Catlledral, Nautilus Shell, Eames
LeW Cilalr, Apple iPod MP3 Player,
and da Villci's Vitruvian Mall.
= =
A
Golden Ratio
AlB = 1.618
BIA = 0.618
Go[den Section
(~)
B
(~
j
I
( )
I
(/
/
Golden Ratio 97


=== ENTRY: Good Continuation (pp 50-50) ===

Elements arranged in a straight line or a smooth curve are
perceived as a group, and are interpl'eted as being more
related than elements not on the line or curve,
Good continuation is one of several principles referred to as Gestalt principles of
perception. It asserts that aligned elements are perceived as a single group or
chunk, and are interpreted as being more related than unaligned elements. For
example. speed markings on a speedometer are easily interpreted as a group
because they are aligned along a linear or circular path. I
The principle of good continuation also explains why lines will generally be per-
ceived as maintaining their established directions, versus branching or bending
abruptly. For example, two V-shaped lines side by side appear simply as two V-
shaped lines. When one V-shaped line is inverted and the other IS placed above it
(forming an X), the shape is interpreted as two opposing diagonal lines instead of
two V-shaped lines-the less abrupt interpretation of the lines Is dominant. A bar
graph in which the bars are arranged in increasing or decreasing order so that the
tops of the bars form a continuous line are more easily processed than bar
arrangements in which the tops of the bars form a discontinuous, abrupt line.]
The ability to accurately perceive objects depends largely on the perceptibility of
tile corners and sharp curves that make up their shape. When sections of a line or
shape are hidden from view, good continuation leads the eye to continue along the
visible segments. If extensions of these segments intersect with minimal disrup·
tion, the elements along the line will be perceived as related. As the angle of dis,
ruption becomes more acute, the elements will be perceived as less related?
Use good continuation to indicate relatedness between elements In a design.
Locate elements such that their alignment corresponds to their relatedness, and
locate unrelated or ambiguously related items on different alignment paths. Ensure
that line extensions of related objects intersect with minimum line disruption.
Arrange elements in graphs and displays such that end points of elements form
continuous, rather than abrupt lines.
See also Alignment, Chunking, Five Hat Racks, and Uniform Connectedness.
98 Unlverc;al rrltlClples 01 Oesign
I The seminal work on good continuation Is
"Untersuchungen zOr Lellre von der Gestalt,
It" [Laws of OrganlLatlon in Perceptual Forms]
by Max Wertheimer, Psychologische
Fcxschung, 1923, vol. 4, p. 301-350, reprinted
In A Source Book of Gestalt Psyc;hology by
Willis D. Ellis (ed .'. Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1999. p. 71-88. See also Principles of Gestalt
PsychoJogy by Kurt Koflka, Harcourt Brace,
1935.
1 See. for example, Elements of Graph Dcstgn by
Slephen M. Kosslyn, W. H Freeman and
Company, 1994, p. 7.
J See, fOf example, "Convexity in Perceptual
Completion: Beyond Coed ContinualJOn ~ by 2111
Uu. David W. Jacobs. and Ronen Basn, Vision
Research. 1999, vol. 39, p. 4244- 4257.
Despite Ihe gaps, the lagged hne IS
still seen as Cl single object because
the occlusions can be bridged With
minimal dls/uption.
The fust glaph is easier to read
than the second because tile end
pomts of lIs bars form a line that
IS more conhnuous.
IV /VV'v V\
10
9
8
c
7
~ 6
.~ 5
'; 4
"' 3
2
Bob Mary Sue Jack
TIm
TI10 Circular alignment of the i nc re~
ments of thiS speedometer make it eVI'
lIent that the numbers and Increments
along tile hnes belong logelher.
10
9
8
c
7
j!!
I.'l 6
~ 5
.~ 4
"' 3
2
1
Mary
Jack
Bob
TIm
Sue
Good continuation is commonly used
III camouflage. FOI example, the lines
on zeblas continue across one anothel
wl1en In a herd, making It difficult for
predators to target anyone zebra.


=== ENTRY: Gutenberg Diagram (pp 51-51) ===

A diagram that describes the general pattern followed by
the eyes when looking at evenly distributed, homogeneous
information. I
The Gutenberg diagram divides a display medium into four quadrants: the primary
optical area at the top left, the terminal area at the bottom right, the strong fallow
area at the top right, and the weak fallow area at the bottom left. According to the
diagram, Western readers naturally begin at the primary optical area and move
across and down the display medium in a series of sweeps to the terminal area.
Each sweep begins along an axis of orientation- a horizontal line created by aligned
elements, text lines, or explicit segments- and proceeds in a left-to-right direction.
The strong and weak fallow areas lie outside this path and receive minimal atten-
tion unless visually emphasized. The tendency to follow this path is metaphorically
attributed to reading gravity-
the left-nght, top-bottom habit formed from reading.'
Designs that follow the diagram work in harmony with reading gravity, and return
readers to a logical axis of orientation, purportedly improving reading rhythm and
comprehension. For example, a layout following the Gutenberg diagram would
place key elements at the top left (e.g .. headline), middle (e.g., image), and bot-
tom right (e.g., contact information). Though designs based directly or indirectly
on the Gutenberg diagram are widespread, there is little empirical evidence that
it contributes to improved reading rates or comprehension.
The Gutenberg diagram is likely only predictive of eye movement for heavy text
information, evenly distributed and homogeneous information, and blank pages or
displays. In all other cases, the weight of the elements of the design in concert with
their layout and composition will direct eye movements. For example, if a nelNSpa-
per has a very heavy headline and photograph in its center, the center will be the
primary optical area. Familiarity with the information and medium also influences
eye movements. For example, a person who regularly views information presented
in a consistent way is more likely to first look at areas that are often changing (e.g.,
new top stories) than areas that are the same (e.g .• the title of a newspaper).
Consider the Gutenberg diagram to assist in layout and composition when the ele-
ments are evenly distributed and homogeneous, or the design contains heavy use
of text. Otherwise, use the weight and compoSition of elements to lead the eye.
See also Alignment, Entry Point. Progressive Disclosure, and Serial Position Effects.
100 Unlverc;al PrinCiples 01 DeSign
I Also known as the Gutenberg rule and the Z
pattern of processing.
I The seminal work on the Gutenberg diagram Is
attributed 10 the typographer Edmund Arnotd,
who is said 10 have developed the concept in
the 1950s. See, for example, Type & Layout:
How Typography and Design Can Get Your
Message Across or Get in the Way. by Colin
Wheildon, Strathmoor Press. 1995.
Reading gravity pulls the eyes from 1I1e
top-left to tile bottom-riglll of Ihe display
medium. In homogeneous displays. 1I1e
Gutenberg diagram mal~es COnlJX)SIUonS
Interesting and easy to read. However,
in helerogoneous displays. U1e Gutenberg
diagram rtoes Ilot apply, and can con-
strain COn1IJOsltlon unnecessarily.
Primary Optical Area
Strong Fallow Area
Axis 01 Orientation
Weak Fallow Area
Terminal Area
The composition of these pages Ulus-
Irates the application of the Gutenberg
diagram. The firsl page is all text. and
It IS, therefore, sale to assume readers
Will begin at the top-left and stop at
the bottom·nght 01 tile page. The pull
quote is placed between these areas.
relnfOl"cing read ing gravity. The place-
rnent of the image on Ihe second page
sllllllarly reinforces reading gravity, which
It would not do If II were posItioned at
ttle top-right or bottom-left 01 the page.
."' .. ~ .... .
NwIj. \I .... _
n~""" .. , .. \\; .'~
_ 111<,\" •• 1..1""
,.-.~ .. ,' -~ ....
... , ....... ~'",,"
-.. -.... ~ .......
lim-II """
~ ..... ! .1111
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL.
\\ 11111'" ~t·\\~-
n".I,:;",', 11;'111,1( 1"1. ..... (( •• 1
(."'Itl li"'. " .. , .. ·."'"",·",·,./)
.. u ...
~ •. _
...... __ _
~~.:.~.:;;.
::~ ..
_ ·s·,
1r.,,, ..... ·.T .. t i.-:
1I1,,,C:'t SH .
' ... I""._m
....
... -~
.. -
....~-~ ... ,,~
.... , -.~,.-~
'1 ;;:
:f~~~ ..... ..
;.;,?#~ . -.::~
.
,~.
.u.,... ..... , .......
~.r- I """ ..
..... ,.. ....... '"
~~1;;iiE§lt
,
'~.--'.'-
Ttle redesign of the Wall Street Journal
leads the eyes of readers, and does
not lollow the Gutenberg diagram.
AddItionally, recumng readers of tile
Wall Street Journal tend to go to the
sedon they find most valuable, (gnor~
Ing Ihe other elements 01 the page.
CHAPTE~ I: Dow~ II,.IIAbbl,·HoIoo
=---=:'::''".:.'::=-===::;=:;'''''::."::..-:: .. -
=.:::=--- --~--~ ....... ---
..... __ .... __ ... -...... _
......... __ ... -
.... _--_ .. _
.......... _-_ .. --
:::=.:::-... -_ ... _ ....... _ ._----
-------
::",!.,"":i::::=:::--
'I',
... _--..............
_
.. _----
__
u __
_
-_._
...... -
-----
--_ ..... _-
GlllclliJ(>rg Diagram 101


=== ENTRY: Hick's Law (pp 52-52) ===

The time it takes to make a decision increases as the
number of alternatives increases.'
Hick's Law states that the time required to make a decision is a function of the
number of available options. It can be used to estimate how long it will take for
people to make a decision when presented with multiple choices. For example,
when a pilot has to press a particular button in response to some event, such as
an alarm, Hick's Law predicts that the greater the number of alternative buttons,
the longer it will take to make the decision and select the correct one. Hick's Law
has implications for the design of any system or process that requires simple deci·
sions to be made based on multiple options.2
All tasks consist of four basic steps, (1) identity a problem or goal, (2) assess the
available options to solve the problem or achieve the goal, (3) decide on an aption,
and (4) implement the option. Hick's Law applies to the third step, decide on an
option. However, the law does not apply to decisions that involve significant levels of
searching, reading, or complex problem solving. For example, a task that has only
three options, but requires reading sentences and intense concentration can easily
take longer than a simple stimulus-resjX)nse task with six options. Therefore, Hick's
Law is most applicable to simple decision-making tasks in which there is a unique
response to each stimulus. (For example, if A happens, then push button 1, If 8
happens, then push button 2.) The law becomes less applicable as the complexity
of tasks increases.]
Designers can improve the efficiency of a design by understanding the implications
of Hick's Law. For example, the law applies to the design of software menus, control
displays, wayfinding layout and signage, and emergency response trnining-any-
where simple decisions are involved. Hick's Law does not apply to complex menus
or hierarchies of options. Menu selection of this type is not a simple decision-making
task since it typically involves reading sentences, searching and scanning for options,
and some level of problem solving.
Keep Hick's Law in mind when designing systems that involve decisions based on
a set of options. When designing for time-critical tasks, minimize the number of
options involved in a decision to reduce response times and minimize errors. When
designs require complex interactions, do not rely on Hick's Law to make design
decisions; rather, test designs on the target population using realistic scenarios. In
training people to perform time-critical procedures, train on the fewest possible
responses for a given scenario. This will minimize response times, error rates, and
training costs.
See also Errors, Fitts' Law, Progressive Disclosure, and Wayfinding.
102
Unlv~lsal PrlllClple'i 01 Design
I Also known as Hick-Hyman Law.
1 The seminal work on Hick's law is "On the
Rate of Gain of Information" by W. E. Hick.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
1952, vol. 4, p. 11-26; and ~ Stimulus informa-
tion as a determinant of reaction time ~ by Ray
Hyman, Journal of Experimental Psychology,
1953. vol. 45, p. 188-196.
J The Hick's Law equation is RT:o a + b log' (n),
where RT == response I1me, a = the total lime
that is not Involved with decision making. b =
an empirically derived constant based on the
cognitive processing time for each option (in
this case '" 0.155 seconds for humans), n =
number of equally probable alternatives. For
example. assume it lakes 2 seconds to detect
an alarm and understand It'S meaning. Further.
assume that pressmg one of five buttons will
solve the problem caused by tl1e alarm. The
time to respond would be RT = (2 sec) +
(0.155 sec)(log' (5}) = 2.36 sec.
~w
...
40
OO N
41
Open
00 0
42
Open Recent Files
~
43
Revert
44
Close
OO W
45
46
Save
00 5
47
Save As ...
000 5
48
Sove a Copy
"\: 00 5
49
Save for Web
"\:000 5
50
51
o
R
G
B
~~~
Menus
l'he time for a person lo select an Item
from a sun pie software menu incleases
with the number of items. Howt:!vcr,
thiS may nol be Ihe case for more
complex menus Involliing a lot of text
or submenus.
Predatory Bellav,ar
The tIme for a predator to target a
prey Increases witll U1E number of
potential prey.
Simple Tasks
The lime for a person to press the
correcl button (R, G. or B) depend,ng
on the color of the light (red, green, or
blue) increases With the number of
posSIble cotors.
'A' 'B' 'C' ' 0' 'E'
'A' ' B' 'C' '0' 'E'
'A' 'B' 'C' ' 0' ' E'
'A' 'B' 'C' '0' ' E'
'A' '8' ' C' ' 0' 'E'
'A' 'B' ' C' ' 0' ' E'
'A' 'B' 'C' '0' 'E'
'A' ' B' ' c' '0' 'E'
'A' '8' 'C' '0' ' E'
' A' 'B' 'C' '0' 'E'
' A' 'B' ' C' ' 0' 'E'
'A' 'B' 'C' '0' 'E'
Test OptIons
Hick's Law does not apply to tasks
ulVolving significant levels of reading
and problem solving, as In takIng
3n exam.
Mart,al Arts
Tile time for a maltlal artIst to block a
punch increases WIth Ihe numbel of
known blockIng techniques.
Device Settings
Tile time lor a person to make simple
deciSIons about adjustments on a
deVIce increases With the numbel of
controls. This may not be the case for
more complex decisions or combina-
tions of settings.
TO
TO
TO
EAST
WEST
NORTH
BrakIng
Tbe time fur a dllver to pft."'SS the brake
to aVOId hittlng an unexpected obstacle
Increases if there is a clear opportunity
to steel around the obstacle.
Road Signs
As long as load sIgns are !lot too dense
01 complex, the t1lne for a driver to
llldke a turn based on a pal11cular road
sign Increases WIth tile total llumbEr.1 of
road signs.
Hick'';) Law 103


=== ENTRY: Hierarchy (pp 53-53) ===

Hierarchical organization is the silllpiest structure for visu-
alizing and understanding coillplexity.
Increasing the visibility of the hierarchical relationships within a system is one of the
most effective ways to increase knowledge about the system. Examples of visible
hierarchies are book outlines, multi-level software menus, and classification diagrams.
Perception of hierarchical relationships among elements is primarily a function of
their relative left-right and top-down positions, but is also influenced by their prox-
imity, size, and the presence of connecting lines. Superordinate elements are com-
monly referred to as parent elements, and subordinate elements as child elements.
There are three basic ways to visually represent hierarchy: trees, nests, and stairs. 1
Tree structures illustrate hierarchical relationships by locating child elements below
or to the right of parent elements, or through the use of other strategies indicating
hierarchy (e.g., size, connecting lines). Tree structures are effective for represent-
ing hierarchies of moderate complexity, but can become cumbersome for large or
complex hierarchies. Tree structures grow large quickly, and become tangled when
multiple parents share common child elements. Tree structures are commonly
used to represent overviews or high-level maps of system organization.
Nest structures illustrate hierarchical relationships by visually containing child ele-
ments within parent elements, as in a Venn diagram. Nest structures are most
effective when representing simple hierarchies. When the relationships between
the different levels of the hierarchy become too dense and complex to be clearly
distinguishable, nest structures become less effective. Nest structures are most
commonly used to group information and functions, and to represent simple logi-
cal relationships.
Stair structures illustrate hierarchical relationships by stacking child elements
below and to the right of parent elements, as in an outline. Stair structures are
effective for representing complex hierarchies, but are not easily browsed, and
falsely imply a sequential relationship between the stacked child elements.
Interactive stair structures found in software often deal with the former problem by
concealing child elements until a parent element is selected. Stair structures are
commonly used to represent large system structures that change over time:'
Hierarchical representation is the simplest method of increasing knowledge about
the structure of a system. Consider tree structures when representing high-level
views of hierarchies of moderate complexity. Consider nest structures when repre-
senting natural systems, simple hierarchical relationsh ips, and grouped informa~
tion or functions. Consider stair structures when representing complex hierarchies,
especially if the volatility and growth of the system represented is unpredictable.
Explore ways to selectively reveal and conceal the complexity of hierarchical struc-
tures to maximize their clarity and effectiveness.J
See also Advance Organizer, Alignment, Five Hat Racks, layering, and Proximity.
104 Universal Principles of Design
1 The seminal works on hierarchy are "The
Architecture of Complexity," Proceedings 01
the American Philosophical Society, 1962,
vol. 106, p. 467--482: and The Sciences of
the Artificial, MIT Press, 1969, both by Herbert
A. Simon.
~ Note that stair hierarchies in software are often
referred to as tree hierarchies.
J Represenllng these structures in three-dimen-
sional space improves little in terms of clarity
and comprehensibility-
though it does result
in some fascinating structures to view and nav-
igate. See, for example. "Cone Trees: Animated
3D Visualizations of Hierarchical Information"
by George G. Robertson. Jock D. Mackinlay,
Stuart K. Card, Proceedings of CHI '91:
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1991 ,
p.189-194.
Trees
Nests
Stairs
.-
o
013
Ill,~nj
\
purposeful
arrangement
drawing or
COnceive or
I
sketch
,,,hian 'arm~
/
~
',,""'po,,,,
a plan
design
r,' '-ljJllI(
/
/
~
~~:;;""I"'OO
""',::::" ~
project
\
~
I""~"";~
11~ 1 1l("
/
'l~nl
create in an
artistic manner
JO OeSI{l11
Iltem.6OC('Il " ... Il"~ I~
I II
(llstomer files
1 11'''L bUf)lif)"".,l.tl.
I I
Cl'"
III
Cl l-Q
,-,
.""
OJ II< m:.'; ij!JC.Il~~II.b l~
Cl R~nold,
II
I II
Cl Smith
0
Cl Thompson
0 8
Cl ScU1 1 ~
3 Item>, 6.0e Ge 1V.1l"bl~
.-
Cl broohun
[J w'l!:or I ~ pMl.r
\l oon .. l r~por t
-
~
.,.
J .................... , ... "'"
l .j;o ..... - .. · Iil l :d .. ~'" I:;!,_. C:t'--.
I~1;/"
)<:o
I :rn ·
1--13 __ _
-.
1~~7-..
"'B"'u.w"
$ ,3''' _l.'!
eo '"' WH:<lW>2Dro(C,)
r. .oi l 1 /1£6 '
1&
~"'-
1<. ")"<9"'_
~ ~
WIKXJWS
1" ~ w'''m
,,-t.''''''''''''''''(le)
' ':!!l(<<IKl_
I!; ~:::~"""
"-.:J
U
Docum~nts and
Settings
"'"', ......... _
..
-
~---
~
'-')!oUI_(tJioI.~"-",7,"''')
lfI .. ':lj:;a 8 Q G ~I JlJJ """""""onoI ___
-
12j2rJMm9,"""
"/,.,lOCO>,. ...
---------,U"""
@j",~
IO'l-t oo!)
Hierarchy 105


=== ENTRY: Hierarchy of Needs (pp 54-54) ===

In order for a design to be successful, it must meet people's
basic needs before it can attempt to satisfy higher-
level needs. I
The hierarchy of needs principle specifies that a design must serve the low-level
needs (e.g., it must function), before the higher-level needs, such as creativity, can
begin to be addressed. Good designs follow the hierarchy of needs principle,
whereas poor designs may attempt to meet needs from the various levels without
building on the lower levels of the hierarchy first. The five key levels of needs in
the hierarchy are described below'
Functionality needs have to do with meeting the most basic design requirements.
For example, a video recorder must, at minimum, provide the capability to record,
play, and rewind recorded programs. Designs at this level are perceived to be of
little or no value.
Reliability needs have to do with establishing stable and consistent performance.
For example, a video recorder should perform consistently and play back recorded
programs at an acceptable level of quality. If the design performs erratically, or is
subject to frequent failure, reliability needs are not satisfied. Designs at this level
are perceived to be of low value.
Usability needs have to do with how easy and forgiving a design is to use. For
example, configuring a video recorder to record programs at a later time should be
easily accomplished, and the recorder should be tolerant of mistakes. If the diffi·
cully of use is too great. or the consequences of simple errors too severe, usability
needs are not satisfied. Designs at this level are perceived to be of moderate value.
Proficiency needs have to do with empowering people to do things better than
they could previously. For example, a video recorder that can seek out and record
programs based on keywords is a significant advance in recording capability,
enabling people to do things not previously possible. Designs at this level are
perceived to be of high value.
Creativity is the level in the hierarchy where all needs have been satisfied, and
people begin interacting with the design in innovative ways. The design, having
satisfied all other needs, is now used to create and explore areas that extend both
the design and the person using the design. Designs at this level are perceived to
be of the highest value, and often achieve cult-like loyalty among users.
Consider the hierarchy of needs in design, and ensure that lower-level needs are
satisfied before resources are devoted to serving higher·level needs. Evaluate
existing designs with respect to the hierarchy to determine where modifications
should be made.
See also 80/20 Rule, Aesthetic-Usability Effect, and Form Follows Function.
106 Ul1Iversal Pnn<;lples of Design
1 The hierarchy of needs is based on Maslow's
Hierarchy of Needs.
1 The seminal work on the concept of a hierar-
chy of needs is MotiVation and Personality
by Abraham Maslow, Addison-Wesley,
19871l954i.
Sel'·Acl ualizatron
Self-Esteem
Love
Safely
PhYSIological
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
The hierarchy of needs speciries that
a design must address lower·level
needs before higher-level needs can
be addressed. The perceIved value of
a deSIgn corresponds to its place in
the hierarclly-i.e., higher levels in the
hierarchy correspond to higher levels
of pelceived value. The levels of hIer-
archy are adapted rrom Maslow's
Hierarchy of Needs.
Hierarchy of Needs
Creativity
Proficiency
Usability
Reliability
Functionality
Hierarchy of Needs 107


=== ENTRY: Highlighting (pp 55-55) ===

A technique for bringing attention to an area of text or irnage.
Highlighting is an effective technique for bringing attention to elements of a design.
If applied improperly, however, highlighting can be ineffective, and actually reduce
performance in these areas. The following guidelines address the benefits and lia-
bilities of common highlighting techniques.!
General
Highlight no more than 10 percent of the visible design; highlighting effects are
diluted as the percentage increases. Use a small number of highlighting tech-
niques applied consistently throughout the design.
Bold, Italics, and Underlining
Use bold, italics, and underlining for titles, labels, captions, and short word
sequences when the elements need to be subtly differentiated. Bolding is gener-
ally preferred over other techniques as it adds minimal noise to the design and
clearly highlights target elements. Italics add minimal noise to a design, but are
less detectable and legible. Underlining adds considerable noise and compro-
mises legibility, and should be used sparingly if at al1.2
Typeface
Uppercase text in short word sequences is easily scanned, and thus can be ad-
vantageous when applied to labels and keywords within a busy display. Avoid
using different fonts as a highlighting technique. A detectable difference between
fonts is difficult to achieve without also disrupting the aesthetics of the typography.
Color
Color is a potentially effective highlighting technique, but should be used sparingly
and only in concert with other highlighting techniques. Highlight using a few
desaturated colors that are clea rly distinct from one another.
Inversing
Inversing elements works well with text, but may not work as well with icons or
shapes. It is effective at attracting attention, but adds considerable noise to the
design and therefore should be used sparingly.
Blinking
Blinking~flashing an element between two states~ is a powerful technique for
attracting attention. Blinking should be used only to indicate highly critical infor-
mation that requires an immediate response, such as an emergency status light. It
is important to be able to turn off the blinking once it is acknowledged, as it com-
promises legibility, and distracts from other tasks.
See also Color, Legibility, and Readability.
108 Universal Principles 01 Design
, See, for example. "A Review of Human Factors
Guidelines and Techniques for the Design of
Graphical Human-Computer Interfaces" by
Martin Maguire. International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies, 1982, vol. 16{3). p.
237- 261.
1 A concise summary of typographic principles
of this kind is found in The Mac is Not a
Typewriter by Robin Williams, Peachpit Press,
1990. Despite the title, the book is of value to
non-Macintosh owners as well.
General
"You mean you can't take less," said the Hatter, "it's very
easy to take more than nothing."
"Nobody asked your opinion," said Alice.
"You mean you can't take less," said the Hatter, "it's very
easy to take more than nothing."
"Nobody asked your opinion," said Alice.
Bold, Italics, and Underlining
Advice from a Caterpillar
"I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir"
said Alice, "because I'm not myself,
you see."
Advice from a Caterpillar
Advice from a CaterRillar
"I can't explain m~, I'm afraid, sir"
said Alice, "because I'm not myself,
you see."
"I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir"
said Alice, "because I'm not myself,
you see."
Typeface
"What is a Caucus-race?" said Alice; not that she wanted
much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that
somebody ought to speak, and no one else seemed
inclined to say anything.
Color
Which brought them back again to the tit:' '1rl1l1iU of the
conversation. Al ice felt a little Irritated at the Caterpillar's
making such
I rv
11011 remarks, and she drew herself up
and said, very gravely, "I think, you ought to tell me who
you are, first."
Inversing
Who stole the tarts?
"- .• .
"What IS a Caucus-race?" said Alice; not that she wanted
much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that
SOMEBODY ought to speak, and no one else seemed
inclined to say anything.
Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation. Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's
making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up
and said, very gravely, "I think, you ought to tell me who
you are, first."
Who stole the tarts?
ecoc
Highlighting 109


=== ENTRY: Iconic Representation (pp 56-56) ===

The use of pictorial images to improve the recognition and
recall of signs and controls.
Iconic representation is the use of pictorial images to make actions. objects. and
concepts in a display easier to find, recognize, learn, and remember. Iconic repre-
sentations are used in signage, computer displays, and control panels. They can
be used for identification (company logo), serve as a space-efficient alternative to
text (road signs). or to draw attention to an item within an informational display
(error icons appearing next to items in a list). There are four types of iconic repre-
sentation: similar, example, symbolic, and arbitrary.'
Similar icons use images that are visually analogous to an action. object, or con-
cept. They are most effective at representing simple actions, objects, or concepts,
and less effectlve when the complexity increases. For example, a sign indicating a
sharp curve ahead can be represented by a similar icon (e.g., curved line). A sign
to reduce speed, however, is an action not easily represented by similar icons.
Example icons use images of things that exemplify or are commonly associated with
an action. object. or concept. They are particularly effective at representing complex
actions, objects, or concepts. For example, a sign indicating the location of an air-
port uses an image of an airplane, rather than an image representing an airport.
Symbolic icons use images that represent an action, object, or concept at a higher
level of abstraction. They are effective when actions, objects. or concepts involve
well-established and easily recognizable objects. For example, a door lock control
on a car door uses an image of a padlock to indicate its function, even though the
padlock looks nothing like Ihe actual control.
Arbitrary icons use images that bear little or no relationship to the action. object, or
concept-Le., the relationship has to be learned. Generally, arbitrary icons should
only be used when developing cross-cultural or industry standards that will be
used for long periods of time. This gives people sufficient exposure to an icon to
make it an effective communication device. For example, the icon for radiation
must be learned, as nothing intrinsic to the image indicates radiation. Those who
work with radiation, however. recognize the symbol all over the world.
Iconic representation reduces performance load, conserves display and control
area, and makes signs and controls more understandable across cultures. Consider
similar icons when representations are simple and concrete. Use example icons
when representations are complex. Consider symbolic icons when representations
involve well-established and recognizable symbols. Consider arbitrary icons when
representations are to be used as standards. Generally. icons should be labeled and
share a common visual motif (style and color) for optimal performance.
See also Chunking, Performance Load, and Picture Superiority Effect.
110 Universal Principles of Deslsn
I The seminal work in Iconic representation is
Symbol Sourcebook by Henry Dreyfuss, Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1984. The four kinds of
iconic representation are derived Irom "Icons
at the Interface; Their Usefulness" by Yvonne
Rogers, Interacting With Computers, vol. 1, p.
105-118.
Similar
Example
Symbolic
Arbitrary
Right Turn
Falling Rocks
Sharp
Stop
Airport
Cut
Basketball
Restaurant
Electricity
Water
Unlock
Fragile
Collate
Female
Radioactive
Resistor
Iconic Representation 111


=== ENTRY: Immersion (pp 57-57) ===

A state of mental focus so intense that awareness of the
"real" world is lost, generally resulting in a feeling of joy
and satisfaction.
When perceptual and cognitive systems are under-taxed, people become apathetic
and bored. If they are over-taxed, people become stressed and frustrated.
Immersion occurs when perceptual and cognitive systems are challenged at near
capacity, without being exceeded. Under these conditions, the person loses a
sense of the "real" world and typically experiences intense feelings of joy and sat-
isfaction. Immersion can occur while working on a task, playing a game, reading
a book, or painting a picture. Immersion is characterized by one or more of the fol-
lowing elements: I
challenges that can be overcome
contexts where a person can focus without significant distraction
clearly defined goals
immediate feedback with regards to actions and overall performance
a loss of awareness of the worries and frustrations of everyday life
a feeling of control aver actions, activities, and the environment
a loss of concern regarding matters of the self (e.g., awareness of
hunger or thirst)
a modified sense of time (e.g., hours can pass by in what seems
like minutes).
It is not clear which of these elements must be present in what combination to
create a generally immersive experience. For example, theme park rides can pro+
vide rich sensory experiences with minimal cognitive engagement and still be
immersive. Conversely, complex games like chess can provide rich cognitive
engagement with minimal sensory experience and also be immersive. Given the
wide range of human cognitive abilities and relatively narrow range of perceptual
abilities, it is generally easier to design activities and environments that achieve
immersion through perceptual stimulation than through cognitive engagement.
However, perceptual immersion is more difficult to sustain for long periods of time
and is, therefore, usable only for relatively brief experiences. Optimal immersive
experiences involve both rich sensory experiences and rich cognitive engagement.
Incorporate elements of immersion in activities and environments that seek to
engage the attention of people over time-
e.g., entertainment, instruction, games,
and exhibits. Provide clearly defined goals and challenges that can be overcome.
Design environments that minimize distractions, promote a feeling of control, and
provide feedback. Emphasize stimuli that distract people from the real world, and
suppress stimuli that remind them of the real world. Achieving the right balance of
elements to achieve immersion is more art than science; therefore, leave ample
time in the design process for experimentation and tuning.
See also Chunking, Depth of Processing, Performance Load, and Storytelling.
112 Universal PrinCiple:;; of Design
I The elements of immersion adapted from
Flow: Tile Psychology of Optimal Experience
by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyl, Harper Collins
Publishers, 1991. See also Narrative as Virtual
Reality by Marie-Laure Ryan, The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2000.
~
WHITE STAR LINE
._4._
BOARDING PASS
PER~ IlSIO~~)1E ,IIlOARD
ITE STARtJlNE'S
R.M.S.
TITANIC
IIMAY, I'I~E& co"
Jt U.AJ)&.1Wl \lUll, Lt)S(XlN
~
lG.l'ATElm.m,I.J\'!RPOQl


=== ENTRY: Interference Effects (pp 58-58) ===

A phenomenon in which mental processing is made slower
and less accurate by competing mental processes.
Interference effects occur when two or more perceptual or cognitive prpcesses are
in conflict. Human perception and cognition involve many different mental systems
that parse and process information independently of one another. The outputs of
these systems are communicated to working memory, where they are interpreted.
When the outputs are congruent, the process of interpretation occurs quickly and
performance is optimal. When outputs are incongruent, interference occurs and
additional processing is needed to resolve the conflict. The additional time required
to resolve such conflicts has a negative impact on performance. A few examples of
interference effects include: I
Stroop Interference-
an irrelevant aspect of a stimulus triggers a mental process
that interferes with processes involving a relevant aspect of the stimulus. For
example, the time it takes to name the color of words is greater when the meaning
and color of the words conflict.
Garner Interference-
an irrelevant variation of a stimulus triggers a mental
process that interferes with processes involving a relevant aspect of the stimulus.
For example, the time it takes to name shapes is greater when they are presented
next to shapes that change with each presentation.
Proactive Interference-existing memories interfere with learning. For example, in
learning a new language, errors are often made when people try to apply the
grammar of their native language to the new language.
Retroactive Interference-
learning interferes with existing memories. For example,
learning a new phone number can interfere with phone numbers already in memory.
Prevent interference by avoiding designs that create conflicting mental processes.
Interference effects of perception (i,e., Stroop and Garner) generally result from
conflicting coding combinations (e.g., a red go button, or green stop button) or
from an interaction between closely positioned elements that visually interact with
one another (e.g., two icons group or blend because of their shape and proximity).
Minimize interference effects of learning (i.e., proactive and retroactive) by mixing
the presentation modes of instruction (e.g., lecture, video, computer, activities),
employing advance organizers, and incorporating periods of rest every thirty to
forty-five minutes.
See also Advance Organizer, Performance Load, Errors, and Mapping.
114 Umversal PrinCiple .. of Design
I The seminal works on interference effects
include "Studies of Interference In Serial
Verbal Reactions~ by James R. Stroop, Journal
of Experimental PsycllOlogy, 1935, vol. 28, p.
643--662; "Stimulus Configuration in Selective
Attention Tasks~ by James R. Pomerantz and
WendeU R. Gamer, Perception &
Psyr;hophysics, 1973, vol. 14, p. 565-569;
an(! "CharacterIStics of Word Enccx:ling- by
Delos O. Wickens, in Coding Processes in
Human Memoryediled by A. W. Mellon and E.
Martin, V. H. Winston, 1972, p. 191-215.
In populations that have learned
that green means go and red means
stop, the Incongruence between
tile color and tile label-icon results
III interference.
In populations that have learned that a
traffic arrow always means go, the
introduction of a red arrow in new traf-
fic lights creates potentially dangerous
interference.
Red
Yellow
Trial 1 o o
D
D o
Black
Green
White
Orange
Gray
Reading the words aloud is easier
Ihan naming their COIOfS. The mental
process for reading is more practiced
and automatic and, Ulerefore, Inter-
feres with the menial process for
naming the colors.
Trial 2
DO
0 0
DO
DD
0 0
Naming the column 01 shapes (hat
stands alone is easier than naming
either of the columns located together.
The close proximity of tile columns
results in the activation of mental
processes for naming proximal
shapes, creating Interference.
Interference Etlects 115


=== ENTRY: Inverted Pyramid (pp 59-59) ===

A method of information presentation in which information
is presented in descending order of importance.
The inverted pyramid method refers to the presentation of information in descend-
ing order of importance, with critical information presented first, followed by less-
important elaboative information. In the normal pyramid method of presentation,
a broad base of foundational information is presented first, moving upward to the
most important piece of information-the main point. For example, in traditional
scientific writing, a historical foundation (the base of the pyramid) is presented
first, followed by the arguments and evidence, and then a conclusion (the tip of
the pyramid).
The inverted pyramid consists of a lead (critical information) and a body (elaborative
information). The lead is a terse summary of the "what," "where," "when," "who,"
"why," and "how" of the information. The body consists of subsequent paragraphs
or chunks of information that elaborate facts and details in descending order of
importance. It is increasingly common in Internet publishing to present only the
lead, and make the body available upon request (e.g., with a "more ... " link).
The inverted pyramid offers a number of benefits over traditional methods of infor-
mation presentation. It places the important information first, where it is more likely
to be remembered. It establishes a context in which to interpret subsequent facts;
initial chunks of information are more likely to be remembered than later chunks
of information. It permits efficient searching and scanning of information. It allows
information to be easily edited for length, because the least important information
will always be at the end. The efficiency of the inverted pyramid is also its limiting
factor. While it provides a succinct, information-dense method of information pres-
entation, the inverted pyramid does not allow the flexibility of building suspense or
creating a surprise ending, so it is often perceived as boring.
Use the inverted pyramid when presentation efficiency is important. Develop leads
that present a concise overview of the information, followed by short chunks of
information of decreasing importance. If interestingness is important and has been
compromised, include multiple media, interesting layouts, and interactivity to com-
plement the information and actively engage audiences. When it is not possible to
use the inverted pyramid method (e.g., in standard scientific writing), consider a
compromise solution based on the principle by providing an executive summary at
the beginning to present the key findings.
See also Advance Organizer, Form Follows Function, Ockham's Razor,
Progressive Disclosure, and Serial Position Effects.
116 Universal Pl ltiLiples of Design
1 The development of the inverted pyramid is
attributed to Edwin Stanton, Abraham Lincoln's
Secretary of War (1865). See, for example. Just
the Facts: How NObjeclivity~ Came to Define
American Journalism by David T. Z. Mindich,
New York University Press, 2<XXJ.
This evening at about 9:30 P.M., at Ford's Theater, the President,
wh ile sitting in his private box with Mrs. Lincoln, Miss Harris, and
Major Rathbone, was shot by an assassin who suddenly emered the
box and approached the President. The assassin then leapt upon the
stage, brandished a large dagger or knife, and made his escape in the
rear of rhe [heater. The pistol-ball entered the back of the
President's head and penetrated nearly through the head. The
wound is mortaL The President has been insensible ever since it was
inflicted and is now dying.
About the same hour an assassin, whether the same or not, entered
Me. Seward's apartments, and under the pretense of having a
prescription, was shown to the Secretary's sick chamber. The
assassin immediately rushed to [he bed, and inflicted twO or three
stabs on the throat and two on the face. It is hoped the wounds
may not be monal. My apprehension is that they will prove fatal.
The nurse alarmed Mr. Frederick Seward, who was in an adjoining
room, and hastened to the door of his father's room, when he met
the assassin, who inflicted upon him one or more dangerous
wounds. The recovery of Frederick Seward is doubtful.
it is not probable that the President will live throughout the night.
General Grant and wife were advenised to be at the theater this
evening, bur he started for Buriingmn at six o'clock [his evening.
At a cabinet meeting at which General Grant was present, the
subject of the state of the country, and the prospect of a speedy
peace was discussed. The President was very cheerful and hopeful,
and spoke very kindly of General Lee and others of the
Confederacy, and of the establishment of government in Virginia.
All the members of the cabinet, except Mr. Seward, are now in
attendance upon [he President.
I have seen Mr. Seward, but he and Frederick are both unconscious.
EDWIN M. STANTON,
Secretary of War. April 14, 1865,
This repol1 of President Lincoln's
assassinatioll establislled the inverted
pyramid style of writing. Its economy
of style, a stark contl'ast to the lavish
prose or the day, was developed for
efficient cornmLlnlcation by telegraph.
Inverted Pyrami(i 117


=== ENTRY: Iteration (pp 60-60) ===

A process of repeating a set of operations until a specific
result is achieved.
Ordered complexity does not occur without iteration. In nature, iteration allows
complex structures to form by progressively building on simpler structures. In
design, iteration allows complex structures to be created by progressively explor-
ing, testing, and tuning the design. The emergence of ordered complexity results
from an accumulation of knowledge and experience that is then applied to the
design. For example, a quality software user interlace is developed through a
series of design iterations. Each version is reviewed and tested, and the design is
then iterated based on the feedback. The interface typically progresses from low
fidelity to high fidelity as more is learned about the interface and how it will be
used. Iteration occurs in all development cycles in two basic forms: design itera-
tion and development iteration,!
Design iteration is the expected iteration that occurs when exploring, testing, and
refining design concepts. Each cycle in the design process narrows the wide range
of possibilities until the design conforms to the design requirements. Prototypes of
increasing fidelity are used throughout the process to test concepts and identify
unknown variables. Members of the target audience should be actively involved in
various stages of iterations to support testing and verify design requirements.
Whether tests are deemed a success or failure is irrelevant in design iteration,
since both success and failure provide important information about what does and
does not work. In fact, there is often more value in failure, as valuable lessons are
learned about the failure points of a design. The outcome of design iteration is a
detailed and well-tested specification that can be developed into a final product.2
Development iteration is the unexpected iteration that occurs when building a prod-
uct. Unlike design iteration, development iteration is rework-Le., unnecessary
waste in the development cycle. Development iteration is costly and undesirable,
and generally the result of either inadequate or incorrect design specifications, or
poor planning and management in the development process. The unknowns
associated with a design should ideally be eliminated during the design stage.
Plan for and employ design iteration. Establish clear criteria defining the degree to
which design requirements must be satisfied for the design to be considered com-
plete. One of the most effective methods of reducing development iteration is to
ensure that all development members have a clear, high-level vision of the final
product. This is often accomplished through well-written specifications accompa-
nied by high~fidelity models and prototypes.
See also Development Cycle, Fibonacci Sequence, Prototyping, and Self~Similarity.
118 Univers;;1 Pnnclples 01 Des[gn
• A seminal contemporary work on iteration in
design is The Evolution of Useful Things by
Henry Petroski. Vintage Books, 1994. See also
Product Design and Development by Karl T.
Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger, McGraw-Hilt
Higher Education, 2nd ed .• 1999. See also
~Positive vs. Negative Iteration in Design" by
Glenn Ballard, Proceedings of the Eighth
Annual Conference of the International Group
for Lean Cons/ruction, 2000.
, A common problem with desIgn iteration is Ihe
absence of a defined endpoint-i.e., each
iteration refines the design, but also reveals
addilion<ll opportunities for refinement, resulting
In a design process thai never ends. To avoid
this, establis/l clear cnterla defining the degree
to which design requirements must be satisfied
lor the design to be considered complete.
Qualily deSign does not occur Without
Iteration. For example, the de.Ciigll of
the SnoWalkels snowshoes is the
result of numerous deSign Iterations
over a two-year period. The design
process made ample usc of proto·
types, which allowed deSigners to
Improve thell understanding 01 design
requlrernents and product perform-
ance, and continually refine the design
with each Iteration.
IteratiOn 119


=== ENTRY: Law of Pragnanz (pp 61-61) ===

A tendency to interpret ambiguous images as simple and
complete, versus com plex and incomplete'
The Law of Pragnanz is one of several principles referred to as Gestalt principles of
perception. It asserts that when people are presented with a set of ambiguous ele-
ments (elements that can be interpreted in different ways), they interpret the ele-
ments in the simplest way. Here, "simplest" refers to arrangements having fewer
rather than more elements, having symmetrical rather than asymmetrical composi-
tions, and generally observing the other Gestalt principles of perception.2
For example, a set of shapes that touches at their edges CQuid be interpreted as
either adjacent or overlapping. When the shapes are complex, the simplest inter-
pretation is that they are adjacent like pieces in a puzzle. When the shapes are
simple, the simplest interpretation is that they overlap one another. The law applies
similarly to the way in which images are recalled from memory. For example, peo-
ple recall the positions of countries on maps as more aligned and symmetrical
than they actually are.
The tendency to perceive and recall images as simply as possible indicates that
cognitive resources are being applied to translate or encode images into simpler
forms. This suggests that fewer cognitive resources may be needed if images are
simpler at the outset. Research supports this idea and confirms that people are
better able to visually process and remember simple figures than complex figures.]
Therefore, minimize the number of elements in a design. Note that symmetrical
compositions are perceived as simpler and more stable than asymmetrical compo-
sitions, but symmetrical compositions are also perceived to be less interesting.
Favor symmetrical compositions when efficiency of use is the priority, and asym-
metrical compositions when interestingness is the priority. Consider all of the
Gestalt principles of perception (closure, common fate, figure-ground relationship,
good continuation, proximity, similarity, and uniform connectedness).
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Ockham's Razor, and Rule of Thirds.
120 lJnlVi;!rsal Prlll[lpl~~'.) 01 Desigil
1 Also known as the law of good configuration,
law of simplicily, law of pregnance, law of pre-
cl:<;ion, and law of good figure.
Z The seminal work on the Law of Pragnanz is
Principles of Gestalt Psychology by Kurt
Koffka, Harcourt Brace, 1935.
, See, for example. "The Status of Minimum
Principle in the Theoretical Analysis of Visual
Perception" by Gary Hatfield and William
Ep$tein, Psychological BUlletin. 1985, vol. 97,
p.155-186.
•
low resolution images (left) of a rock
formation on Mars led many to con-
clude that intelligent life once existed
there. Higher-resolution images (right)
taken some years later suggest a more
Earth-based explanation: Humans tend
to add order and meaning to patterns
and formations that do not exist out-
side their perception.
Both sets of figures are interpreted
as Simple ovel'lapping shapes, rather
than a more complex interpretatioll-
e.g., two Illveited ill " shapes and a
square, and two triangles and a
five-sided polygon.
:-)
:-(
: -I
:-0
;-)
These sets of characters are inter-
preted as single faces rather than mUl-
tiple independent characters.
Dazzle camouflage schemes lIsed on
war ships were designed to prevent
simple interpretations of boat type and
orientation, making it a difficult target
for submarines. This is a rendering of
tile French cruiser G/aite.
Law of Pragnanz 121


=== ENTRY: Layering (pp 62-62) ===

The process of organizing information into related group-
ings in order to manage complexity and reinforce
relationships in the information.
Layering involves organizing information into related groupings and then presenting
or making available only certain groupings at anyone time. Layering is primarily used
to manage complexity, but can also be used to reinforce relationships in information.
There are two basic kinds of layering: two-dimensional and three-dimensional. J
Two-dimensional layering involves separating information into layers such that only
one layer of information can be viewed at a time. Two-dimensional layers can be
revealed in either a linear or nonlinear fashion. Linear layers are useful when infor-
mation has a clear beginning, middle, and end (e.g., stories), and are revealed
successively like pages in a book. Nonlinear layers are useful when reinforcing
relationships between the layers. The types of nonlinear layer relationships can be
hierarchical, parallel, or web. Hierarchical layers are useful when information has
superordinate and subordinate relationships within itself (e.g., organizational chart),
and are revealed top-down or bottom-up in rigid accordance with the hierarchical
structure. Parallel layers are useful when information is based on the organization
of other information (e.g., thesaurus), and are revealed through some correspon-
dence with that organization. Web layers are useful when 1nformation has many
different kinds of relationships within itself (e.g., hypertext), and are revealed
through any number of associative linkages to other layers.
Three-dimensional layering involves separating information into layers such that
multiple layers of information can be viewed at a time. Three-dimensional layers
are revealed as either opaque or transparent planes of information that sit atop
one another (Le., in a third dimension). Opaque layers are useful when additional
information about a particular item is desired without switching contexts (e.g., soft-
ware pop-up windows). Transparent layers are useful when overlays of information
combine to illustrate concepts or highlight relationships (e.g" weather maps).2
Use two-dimensional layering to manage complexity and direct navigation through
information. Consider linear layers when telling stories and presenting sequences
of time-based events, and use nonlinear layers when emphasizing relationships
within the information. Use three-dimensional layering to elaborate information and
illustrate concepts without switching contexts. Consider opaque layers when pre-
senting elaborative information, and transparent layers when illustrating concepts
or highlighting relationships in information.
See also Chunking, Five Hat Racks, and Progressive Disclosure.
122 UOlversal Pnnciples of DeSign
I A similar concept is found In Designing
Business: Mulliple Media, Multiple Disciplines
by Clement Mok, Adobe Press, 1996, p.
102- 107 [OrganIzational ModelsJ.
1 See, for example, Envisioning Information by
Edward R. Tufte, Graphics Press, 1998, p.
53--65; 81-95 [layering and Separation; Color
and InformationJ.
Two-Dimensional Layering
Linear
Beginning
Middle 1
Middle 2
Nonlinear
Hierarchical
President
Vice
President
Services
Manager
Parallel
Vice
President
Products
Sales
Manager
Word
Synonym
Web
Related
Information
Word
Synonym
Word
Related
Information
Related
Information
Synonym
Related
Information
Home
Page
Related
Information
Two-dimensional layering IS useful
for presentation and navigation. layers
are revealed one at a time, like pages
in a book.
End
Production
Manager
Related
Information
Three-Dimensional Layering
Opaque
Phoenix
Transparent
-po
Salem
Saclllllllnto
Phoenix Is the
caPItal 01 Arlzona
Three-dimensional layering is useful for
elaboration and highlighting.
Relalionships and patterns on one layer
of Information (left) are elalxJratecl by
layers of information that pop up 01
overlay (right).
layering 123


=== ENTRY: Legibility (pp 63-63) ===

The visual clarity of text, generally llased on the size,
typeface, contrast, text block, and spacing of the
characters used.
Confusion rega rding the research on legibility is as persistent as it is pervasive.
The rapid growth and advancement of modern desktop publishing, Web-based
publishing, and multimedia presentation continue to compound the confusion with
increasing font and layout capabilities, display and print options, and the need to
effectively integrate with other media. The following guidelines address common
issues regarding text legibility'
Size
Far printed text, standard 9- to 12-point type is considered optimal. Smaller sizes
are acceptable when limited to captions and notes. Use larger type for low-resolu-
tion displays and more senior audien ces. ~
Typeface
There is no performance difference between serif and sans serif typefaces, so
select based on aesthetic preference. Sentence case text should be used for text
blocks. On low-resolution displays, antialiasing the text may marginally improve
legibility, but primarily serves as an aesthetic enhancement of the typeface?
Contrast
Use dark text on a light background or vice versa. Performance is optimal when
contrast levels between text and background exceed 70 percent. Foreground/
background color combinations generaUy do not affect legibility as long as you
observe the minimum contrast level, so select based on aesthetic preference.
Patterned or textured backgrounds can dramatically reduce legibility, and should
be avoided.4
Text Blocks
There is no performance difference between justified and unjustified text, so select
based on aesthetic preference. For 9- to 12-point type, a line length of 3 to 5 inches
(8 cm to 13 cm) is recommended, resulting in a maximum of about 10 to 12
words per line, or 35 to 55 characters per line.s
Spacing
For 9- to 12-point type, set leading (spacing between text lines, measured from
baseline to baseline) to the type size plus 1 to 4 points. Proportionally spaced
typefaces are preferred over monospaced.
See also Iconic Representation and Readability.
124 Universal Principles of Design
1 The seminal empirical works on legibility for
print are Bases for Effective Reading,
University of Minnesola Press, 1963; and
Legibility of Print. Iowa State University Press,
1965, both by Miles A, Tinker. A comprehen-
sive and elegant contemporary reference from
a typographic perspective is HIe Elements of
Typographic Style by Robert Bringhurst.
Hartley & Marks (2nd ed.), 1997.
1 Legibility research on low·resolution computer
displays continues to yield mixed results but
generally supports Tinker's original findings.
However, be conservative to account for lower-
resolution displays.
l On lower-resolution displays and for type
smaller than 12 point. use sans serif typefaces
without antialiasing. Serifs and antialiasing blur
the characters of smaller type and, therefore,
compromise legibility.
• Dark text on light backgrounds is preferred.
High-contrast, inverse text can "viSUally bleed"
to the background and dramatically reduce
legibility. Factors other than legibility should be
considered when selecting foreground/back-
ground color combinations (e.g., color bl i nd~
ness and fatigue), 50 select carefully and test
atypical combinations.
, The speed with which text can be: visually
processed is greatest on long text lines (80
characters or more). However, readers prefer
short text lines (35 to 55 characters). Unless
visual processing speed is cri\icalto the design
task, shorter text lines are recommended. See.
for example, "The Effects of Line Length and
Methoct of Movement on Patterns of Reading
from Screen," by Mary C. Dyson and Gary J.
Kipping. Visible Language. 1998, vol. 32(2),
p. I50-181.
Size
This is 9-point Trade Gothic
This is lO-point Trade Gothic
This is 12-point Trade Gothic
Typeface
Serif VS. San Serif
Serif typefaces have small "feel" allhe
ends of the letters.
Serif
Sans Serif
Uppercase vs. Mixed Case
People recognize words by letter groups
and shapes. Uppercase
text IS more difficult to read than
sentence case and tille case because
the shapes of uppercase words are
all rectangular.
Antia liased vs. Aliased Text
Antlaliased text looks smooth because ot
pixels added to smooth the
transition belween !tIe text color and
the background color. Alrased text
looks jagged because it does not
contain tllese transition pixels.
Antialiased
Aliased
IAI ice"'s1WVemoreSi'n'WOnCfefl'allilJ
mE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLANDI
Contrast
Textblocks
Aligned Left, Ragged Right Text
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box
that was lying under the table: she
opened it, and found in it a very small
cake, on which the words "EAT ME"
were beautifully marked in currants.
Spacing
Leading
Leading (rhymes with sleddmg) is tile
amount of vertical space from the base-
line of one line of text to tile
Justified Text
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that
was lying under the table: she opened it,
and found in it a very small cake, on which
the words "EAT ME" were beautifully
marked in currants.
baseline of the next line of text. Below.
the type sIze !s 12 POUlts and the lead-
ing IS 18 pornts.
Text Cases
This is sentence case
This is litle Case
this is lowercase
THIS IS UPPERCASE
The Mad Hatter
Aligned Right, Ragged Left Text
Soon her eye fell on a little glass
box that was lying under the table: she
opened it, and found in it a very small
cake, on which the words "EAT ME"
were beautifully marked in currants.
"Yes,lbatsJt,"-silldJtle...l::iatter wit~~~glL5t'£BlwaYSJeidime~T "m" ",
--'illd-'>'lB'lLe no timeJo-'Nasn ttleJbiDgsJ1el weeJlWbiles "
~:::::,
Monospaced vs. Proportionally
Spaced Typefaces
In monospacecllypefaccs, all characters
amounL<; of horizontal space, depending
assume the same amount of ilorizontal
on the Wic!Ul of tile actual ctlaracter
space. In proportionally spaced
and the relatiollsllips among groups
typefaces, characters assume variable
of characters.
r:orflfl l\ili ltJlllJl)~irDb'e'a1lTIl"IltliliITQ'~
"e~Iel:1LlS!b\
~,~=cTC
IO~rl
l.!L""t1eW
monospaced typeface
l":affiN\ZltWb~e;d li~ea~dl I 1"l liih'e l trAl~bOslb'olu~'e~d!J
proportionally spaced typeface
Legibility 125


=== ENTRY: Life Cycle (pp 64-64) ===

All products progress sequentially through four stages of
existence: introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.
All products progress through stages of existence that roughly correspond with
birth, adolescence, adulthood. and death. For example. a new type of electronic
device is envisioned and developed; its popularity grows; after a while its sales
plateau; and then finally, the sales decline. Understanding the implications of each
of these stages allows designers to prepare for the unique and evolving require-
ments of a prcxiuct over its lifetime. There are four basic stages of life for all proo-
ucts, introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.'
Introduction
The introduction stage is the official birth of a product. It will at times overlap with
the late testing stage of the development cycle. The design focus in this stage is to
monitor early use of the design to ensure proper performance, \YOrking closely with
customers to tune or patch the design as necessary.
Growth
The growth stage is the most challenging stage, where most products fail. The
design focus In this stage is to scale the supply and performance of the product to
meet the growing demand, and provide the level of support necessary to maintain
customer satisfaction and growth. Efforts to gather requirements for the next-gen-
eration product should be underway at this stage.
Maturity
The maturity stage is the peak of the product life cycle. Product sales have begun
to diminish and competition from competitors is strong. The design focus at this
stage is to enhance and refine the product to maximize customer satisfaction and
retention. Design and development of the next-generation procluct should be well
underway at this stage.
Decline
The decline stage is the end of the life cycle. Product sales continue to decline
and core market share is at risk. The design focus in this stage is to minimize
maintenance costs and develop transition strategies to migrate customers to new
products. Testing of the next generation product should begin at this stage.
Consider the life cycle of a product when planning and preparing for the future.
During the introduction phase, work closely with early adopters to refine and tune
products. During the growth stage, focus on scaling product supply and perform-
ance. During the maturity stage, focus on customer satisfaction through perform-
ance enhancements and improved support. During decline, focus on facilitating the
transition to next generation products. Note that the development cycle for the next-
generation product begins during the grOlNlh stage of a current-generation product.
See also Development Cycle. Hierarchy of Needs, Iteration, and Prototyping.
126 Universal PrinCiples of Design
1 The seminal \¥Ofk on the producllife cycle is
"Internationallnvestmenl and International
Trade in the Product Cycle" by Raymond
Vernon, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1966,
vol. 80, p. 190-207. A contemporary review of
the product life cycle is found in Marketmg
Management by Philip Kotler, Prentice-Hail,
11" ed., 2002.
Introduction
+
Audience
Early Adopters
Market
Small
Sales
Low
Competition
Low
Business Focus
Awareness
Design Focus
Tuning
Growth
/
/
/
/
Mainstream
Growing
High
Moderate
Market Share
Scaling
/
/
Maturity
Decline
Late Adopters
Laggards
Large
Contracting
Flattening
Moderate
High
Moderate
Customer Retention
Transition
Support
Transition
The needs of a product change over
the course of ,ts hfe cycle. It '5 impor-
!ant to understand the dynamiCs of
these changes In order to focus bUSI-
ness and design resources accordingly.
Failure to do so shortens the life cycle
of a product.
Ltft' Cycl~ 127


=== ENTRY: Mapping (pp 65-65) ===

A relationship between controls and their movements or
effects. Good mapping between controls and their effects
results in greater ease of use.'
Turn a wheel, flip a switch, or push a button, and you expect some kind of effect.
When the effect corresponds to expectation, the mapping is considered to be good
or natural. When the effect does not correspond to expectation, the mapping is
considered to be poor. For example, an electric window control on a car door can
be oriented so that raising the control switch corresponds to raising the window.
and lowering the control switch lowers the window. The relationship between the
control and raising or lowering the window is obvious. Compare this to an orienta-
tion of the control switch on the surface of an armrest. such that the control
motion is forward and backward. The relationship between the control and the
raising and lowering of the window is no longer obvious; does pushing the control
switch forward correspond to raising or lowering the window?7
Good mapping is primarily a function of similarity of layout, behavior, or meaning.
When the layout of stovetop controls corresponds to the layout of burners, this is
similarity of layout; when turning a steering wheel left turns the car left, this is simi-
larity of behavior; when an emergency shut-off button is colored red, this is simi-
larity of meaning (e.g., most people associate red with stop). In each case, similar-
ity makes the control-effect relationship predictable, and therefore easy to use.J
Position controls so that their locations and behaviors correspond to the layout and
behavior of the device. Simple control-effect relationships work best. Avoid using a
single control for multiple functions whenever possible; it is difficult to achieve
good mappings for a one control-multiple effect relationship. In cases where this is
not possible, use visually distinct modes (e.g., different colors) to indicate active
functions. Be careful when relying on conventions to attach meaning to controls,
as different population groups may interpret the conventions differently (e.g., in
England, flipping a lightswitch up turns it off and flipping it down turns it on).
See also Affordance, Interference Effects, Proximity, and Visibility_
128 Universal PrinCiples 01 DeSign
I Also known as control-display relationship and
stimulus-response compatibility.
1 The seminal work on mapping is The Design of
Everyday Thmgs by Donald Norman,
Doubleday, 1990.
l For a review 01 these kinds of issues, see
Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought by
Merideth Gattis (ed'), MIT Press, 2001.
(11)<11)
(11)<11)
(11)<11)
<II)
<II)
The relatlonstllp between stovetop
controls and burners is ambiguous
when the controls are horizontally
oriented and equally spaced
(poor mapping). The relationship
becomes clearer when the controls
are grouped With the burners. but
the honzontal orientation still
confuses which control goes with
Wilich burner (pOOl, but improved
mapping). Wilen lhe layout 01 the
conlrols corresponds to the layout of
the burners, the control-burner rela-
tionships are clear (good mapping).
The relationship between the
window control and the raising
and lowering of tile window is
obvious when it IS mounted on
the wall of the door (good lTIapping).
but ambiguous when mounted
on lhe surface of the armrest
(poor mapPing).
T ,
The Segway Human Transp0l1er
makes excellent use of mapping.
Lean forward to go forward. and
lean backward to go backward.
lean
lean
backward
forward
to Iravel
to travel
backward
forward
MapPing 129


=== ENTRY: Mental Model (pp 66-66) ===

People understand and interact wit~l systems and environ-
ments based on mental representations developed
from experience.
Mental models are representations of systems and environments derived from
experience. People understand systems and environments, and interact with them,
by comparing the outcomes of their mental models with the real-world systems
and environments. When the imagined and real outcomes correspond, a mental
model is accurate and complete. When they do not correspond, the mental model
is inaccurate or incomplete. Wilh regards to design, there are two basic types of
mental models: mental models of how systems work (system mooels) and mental
models of how people interact with systems (interaction models),1
Designers generally have very complete and accurate system models, but often
have weak interaction models-I.e., they know much about how a system works,
but little about how people will interact with the system. Conversely, users of a design
tend to have sparse and inaccurate system models, but through use and experience
commonly attain interaction models that are more complete and accurate than
those of designers. Optimal design results only when designers have an accurate
and complete system model, obtain an accurate and complete interaction model,
and then design a system interface that reflects an efficient merging of both models?
Designers can obtain accurate and complete interaction models through personal
use of the system, laboratory testing (e.g., focus groups and usability testing), and
direct observation of people interacting with the system, or similar systems. Use of
the system by the deSigner will reveal obvious design problems, but will fail to reveal
the problems of interaction that emerge when the system is used by people who
are unfamiliar with it. Laboratory testing is useful for evaluating designs in a can·
trolled environment, but must be conducted with care, as the artificial context,
and resulting expectation effect, can compromise the validity of the results.
Direct observation of users in the target environment is the preferred method for
acquiring accurate information about how people interact with systems, but is
costly and impractical for designs that afe not yet publicly available.
Design with people's interaction models in mind. If there is a standard mental
model for how something works, try to design leveraging that model. When this is
not possible, (e.g., when the system is new and novel), create an interaction expe-
rience that draws from common mental models as much as possible, such as the
desktop metaphor for computers. However, do not contrive design just to leverage
a familiar model- it is better to have people learn a new model that is clear and
consistent, than to use a familiar model that does not fit. Actually use the systems
that you design. and employ laboratory testing and field observation in order to
develop accurate and complete interaction models. Above all, watch people use
the design and take note of how they use it.
See also Affordance, Expectation Effects, Mapping, and Mimicry.
130 Un1versal Pnnclples 01 Dc<;lgll
, The seminal works on mental models are The
Nature of Explanation by Kenneth Craik,
cambridge University Press. 1943; and Menial
Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of
Language. Inference. and Consciousness by
Philip N. Johnson-laird, Cambridge University
Press, 1983. For a design perspective, see
~Surrogates and Mappings: Two Kinds of
Conceptual Models for Interactive Devices~ by
Richard M. Young, and HSome Observations
on Mental Models" by Donald Norman, both in
Mental Models by D. Gentner and A. Stevens
(Eds.), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1983.
• Note that an effICient merging does not simply
mean revealing the system model. It may
mean concealing the system mocIel from
users, revealing the system model to users. or
a combination therein.
Despite tile measurable satety benefits
of anillock brakes In controlled tests
with trained drivers, research by the
Highway Loss Data Inslttute Indicates
that anti lock brakes have not reduced
the frequency or cost of accidents 111
real-world driving situations.
Tile likely calise is tllal people are
not using antilock brakes properly-
or rather; anti lock brakes are not
deSigned properly. The interaclion
model for anti lock brakes differs radi
cally rrom the Interaction model for
conventional bral<es.
This suggests that designers gave
IrUle consideration 10 the interaction
models of the target audience in Ihe
design process.
Interaction Model for Conventional Brakes
On slick surfaces ...
• depress the brake pedal smoothly
• pump brakes to prevent brakes from locking up
• do not steer while braking, except to counter-steer
• noise and vibration are signs thaI something is wrong
INCORRECT INTERACTION
slamming brakes/steerina: while braking
Car will take a longer time to stop and will not make the turn
wei, slick surface
wet slick surface
CORRECT INTERACTION
pumping brakes
Car will take a shorter time to stop and may make the turn
wet, slick surface
wet, slick surface
Interaction Model for ABS Brakes
On slick surfaces ...
• depress the brake pedal fast and hard
• do not pump brakes
• steer while braking
• noise and vibration are sign5 that the system is operating properly
CORRECT INTERACTION
slamming brakes/sleering while braking
Gar will properly stop and make the turn
wei, slick surface
wet, slick surface
INCORRECT INTERACTION
pumping brakes
Car will take a longer lime to slop and will not make the turn
wet, slick surface
wet, slick surface
Mental Model 131


=== ENTRY: Mimicry (pp 67-67) ===

The act of copying properties of familiar objects, organ-
isms, or environments in order to realize specific benefits
afforded by those properties.
In nature, mimicry refers to the copying of properties of familiar objects, organ-
isms, or environments in order to hide from or deter other organisms. For exam-
ple. katydids and walking sticks mimic the leaves and branches of plants to hide
from predators, and the viceroy butterfly mimics the less tasty monarch butterfly to
deter predators. In design, mimicry refers to copying properties of familiar objects,
organisms, or environments in order to improve the usability, likeability, or func-
tionality of an object. There are three basic kinds of mimicry in design: surface.
behavioral, and functional. I
Surface mimicry is defined as making a design look like something else. When a
design mimics the surface aspects of a familiar object, the design implies (by its
familiar appearance) the way it will function or can be used. An example is the use
of computer software icons that are designed to look like folders and documents. J
Behavioral mimicry is defined as making a design act like something else (e.g.,
making a robotic dog act like a real dog). Behavioral mimicry is useful for improv-
ing likeability, but should be used with caution when mimicking complex behaviors
from large repertoires. For example, mimicking behaviors like smiling generally
elicit positive responses, but can give the impression of artificiality or deceit if
inconsistent with other cues (e.g .. a baby doll that smiles when touched- or
spanked).'
Functional mimicry is defined as making a design work like something else.
Functional mimicry is useful for solving mechanical and structural problems (e.g.,
mimicking the keypad of an adding machine in the design of a touch tone tele-
phone). Significant insights and rapid progress can be achieved by mimicking
existing solutions and design analogs. However, functional mimicry must be per-
formed with caution since the physical principles governing function may not
transfer from one context to another or from one scale to another (e.g., early
attempts at human flight by flapping wings)'
Mimicry is perhaps the oldest and most efficient method for achieving major
advances in design. Consider surface mimicry to improve usability, ensuring that
the perception of the deSign corresponds to how it functions or is to be used.
Consider behavioral mimicry to improve likeability, but exercise caution when
mimicking complex behaviors. Consider functional mimicry to assist in solving
mechanical and structural problems, but also consider transfer and scaling effects
that may undermine the success of the mimicked properties.
See also Affordance, Baby-Face Bias, Convergence, Savanna Preference, and
Scaling Fallacy.
132 Unl\'l!lsal Pnnclples of DC'iign
1 The history of mimicry in design likely pre-
dates the development of lools by early
humans. The seminal work on mimicry In
plants and animals was performed by Henry
Bates and Frill Muller In the late 1800s.
• See, for example, The Design of E~y
Things by Donald Norman, Doubleday, 1990.
j Sec, for example. DeSigning Sociable Robots
by Cynthia L 8reazeal, MIT Press, 2002; and
-Ttle Lovable Cat: Mimicry Stnkes Again~ in
The ThfOWlng MadOnna; fssays on the Bram
by William H. CaMn, iUniversc, 2(0),
• See, for example, BlOfnimlCl}'; Innovation
Inspired by Nature by Janlne M. Benyus,
William Morrow & Company. 1998; and Cats'
Paws and calC/pulis; MeciJanical Worlds of
Nalure and People hy Steven Vogel, W. W.
Norton & Company. 2OCXJ.
n
~~
[[
I
~
\...
The MImic Octopus is capable of both
surface and behavioral mimiCry, In
thiS case changing Its pattern and tex·
ture. and hIding all but two legs In
order to mimiC the hIghly poisonous
Sea Snake.
t(d.
Trash
liJ
Recycle Bin
L".J~
Documents
c::J L:t:ll
tt:n DO
c::J
GJ ITI!IJIIJ fBO
GJ 8] [IH.!J GO
GJ OJCIJl2J GB
@) m[QQJo
Tile Sony AIHO mln llCS many key
canine behaviors
barking, wagging
tatl-Iewraging tile positive feelings
many people have for dogs to make
tile desIgn more appealing.
Work
Document
Data.txt
Murlll:fY IS an effective strategy 10
begin exploring a design probleln,
but It sllould not be assumed that
nlunicked solutions ale correct or best.
For eJ<ample. Ihe eally design of Ule
pllone keypad mimicked the keypad
of adding macl1lnes. US1Jbiltty testing
by researchers al Bell I.ilboratones
suggesled that an I11verted keypad
layout was easier to master. Bell
decided to abandon the mimicked
solullon and establish a new standard
rOI telephones .
Surface ml1111cry is common In
Ihe desIgn 01 soflware icolls
and controls. Even to those
unfamilIar With the software,
the familiar appearance of these
objects hints at their funcllan.
Mimicry 133


=== ENTRY: Mnemonic Device (pp 68-68) ===

A method of reorganizing information to make the infor-
mation easier to remember.
Mnemonic devices are used to reorganize information so that the information is
simpler and more meaningful and, therefore, more easily remembered. They
involve the use of imagery or words in specific ways to link unfamiliar information
to familiar information that resides in memory. Mnemonic devices that involve
imagery are strongest when they are vivid. peculiar, and exaggerated in size or
quantity. Mnemonic devices that involve words are strongest when the words are
familiar and clearly related. Mnemonic devices are useful for remembering names
of new things, large amounts of rate information, and sequences of events or pro·
cedures. A few examples of mnemonic devices include:1
Firsl-Letter-The first letter of items to be recalled are used to form the first letters
in a meaningful phrase, or combined to form an acronym. For example, Please
Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally to assist in the recall of the arithmetic order of opera-
tions: Parentheses, Exponents, Multiplication, Division, Addition, Subtraction; or
AIDS as a simple means of referring to and remembering Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome.
Keyword-A word that is similar to, or a subset of, a word or phrase that is linked
to a familiar bridging image to aid in recall. For example, the insurance company
AFLAC makes Its company name more memorable by reinforcing the similarity of
the pronunciation of AFLAC and the quack of the duck. The duck in the advertis-
ing is the bridging image.
Rhyme-One or more words in a phrase are linked to other words in the phrase
through rhyming schemes to aid in recall. For example, red touches yellow kill a
fellow is a IX>pular mnemonic 10 distinguish the venomous coral snake from Ihe
nonvenomous king snake.
Feature-Name-A word that is related to one or more features of something that
is linked to a familiar bridging image to aid in recall. For example, the rounded
shape of the Volkswagen Beetle is a key feature of its biological namesake, which
serves as the bridging image.
Consider mnemonic devices when developing corporate and product identities,
slogans and logos for advertising campaigns, instructional materials dealing with
rote information and complex procedures, and other contexts in which ease of
recall is critical to success. Use vivid and concrete imagery and VoJOrds that lever-
age familiar and related concepts.
See also Chunking, Serial Position Effects, and von Restorff Effect.
134
UniVC (~il l PrtnClples of Design
t The seminal contemporary YJO(k on mnemon-
ics Is The An o( Memory by Frances A. Yates,
University of Chicago Press, 1974.
Clever use 01 mnemonIc devlC:~ can
dramatically Influence recall. These
logos employ VdflOUS combin81iolls of
mnemonic deviCes to make them
nlore memorable.
Hip
'.~
MnL'IlIOlilc DeVice 135


=== ENTRY: Modularity (pp 69-69) ===

A method of managing system complexity that involves
dividing large systems into multiple, smaller self~
contained systems.
Modularity is a structural principle used to manage complexity in systems. It
involves identifying fUnctional clusters of similarity in systems, and then transform-
ing the dusters into interdependent self-contained systems (modules). For example,
the modular design of computer memory chips provides computer owners the
option of increasing the memory in their computer without any requirement to do
so. If the design of the computer and memory chips were not modular in this way,
the only practical method of upgrading computer memory would be to buy a new
computer. The option to easily and inexpensively improve a system without the
requirement to do so gives modular designs an intrinsic advantage over non-
modular designs. l
Modules should be designed to hide their internal complexity and interact with
other modules through simple interfaces. The result is an overall reduction in
system complexity and a decentralization of system architecture, which improves
reliability, flexibility, and maintainability. Additionally, a modular design encourages
innovation of modules, as well as competition regarding their design and
manufacturej it creates an opportunity for third parties to compete to develop
better modules.
The benefits of modular design are not without costs: modular systems are signifi-
cantly more complex to design than nonmodular systems. Designers must have
significant knowledge of the inner workings of a system and its environment to
decompose the systems into modules, and then make those modules function
together as a whole. Consequently, most modular systems that exist today did not
begin that way-
they have been incrementally transformed to be more modular as
knowledge of the system increased.
Consider modularity when designing or modifying complex systems. Identify func-
tional clusters of similarity in systems, and clearly define their relationships with
other system elements. If feasible, create modules that conceal their complexity
and communicate with other modules through simple, standard interfaces. Do not
attempt complex modular designs without experienced designers and a thorough
understanding of the system. However, consider the incremental modularization of
existing systems, especially during maintenance and product updates:
See also 80/20 Rule, Chunking, and Cost-Benefit.
136 Universal Principl e5 of Design
I The seminal work on modularity is Design
Rules: Volume I. The Power of Modularity by
Carliss Y. Baldwin and Kim B. Clark, MIT
Press, 2000.
; Many designers resist modularity for fear of
limiting creativity. However, modules applied at
the appropriate level will liberate designer5
from useless activity and allow them 10 focus
creativity where it is most needed.
Personal Computer
Power Supply
Processor B
Graphics Card
7
io
iF
W
Sound Card
io"
.. ,
@" J'in
t:rJ* . ·'47'"49:· '.'
!I
0" iil!!~I~i!b:=
--y
The rapid increase In availability,
quality, and computing power of per~
sonal computers over the last twenty
years is largely attributable to their
modular deSigns. The key components
of the computer are standard modules
thai use standard interfaces. This
enables competition among third-party
manufacturers to improve modules
and reduce price, which also improves
the computer and reduces its price.
CD-ROM Drive
=
=
I
=
c=J
c=J
=
=
=
=
c=J
c=J
=,,----, =
=
=
Floppy Drive
~
I
,=
I
I
,
,=
Hard Drive
,=
Memory
E;2S;,S;,s;,s;,1
"
'\
Mochllarity 137


=== ENTRY: Most Average Facial (pp 70-70) ===

Appearance Effect
A tendency to prefer faces in which the eyes, nose, lips,
and other features are close to the average of a populationl
People find faces that approximate their population average more attractive than
faces that deviate from their population average. In this context, population refers
to the group in which a person lives or was raised, and average refers to the arith-
metic mean of the form. size, and position of the facial features. For example,
when pictures of many faces within a population are combined (averaged) to form
a single composite image, the composite image is similar to the facial configura-
tions of professional models in that population.'
The most average facial appearance effect is likely the result of some combination
of evolution, cognitive prototypes, and symmetry. Evolution by natural selection
tends to select out extremes from a population over time. Therefore, it is possible
that a preference for averageness has evolved as an indicator of general fitness.
Cognitive prototypes are mental representations that are formed through experi·
ence. As people see the faces of other people, their mentol representation of what
a face is may be updated through a process similar to compositing. If this is the
case, average faces pattern-match easily with cognitive prototypes, and contribute
to a preference. Finally, average faces are symmetrical, and symmetry has long
been viewed as an indicator of health and fitness. Asymmetric members of all
species tend to have fewer offspring and live shorter lives-generally the asym-
metry is the result of disease, malnutrition, or bad genes.)
The evolution of racial preferences among isolated ethnic groups demonstrates
the influence of the most average facial appearance effect. Isolated groups form
cognitive prototypes based on the faces within their population. When two of these
groups first encounter one another, they invariably regard members of the unfamil-
iar group as strange and less attractive. The facial appearance of unfamiliar groups
is perceived as less attractive because it is further from the average facial appear-
ance of the familiar group. As the differences become more familiar, however,
cognitive prototypes are updated and the definition of facial beauty changes.
The most average facial appearance for a population is an accurate benchmark of
beauty for that population. There are other elements that contribute to attractive-
ness (e.g. , smile versus scowl), but faces that are not average will not be perceived
as attractive. Use composite images of faces created from randomly sampled
faces of target populations to indicate local perceptions of beauty. Consider the
use of digital compositing and morphing software to develop attractive faces from
common faces for advertising and marketing campaigns, especially when real
models are unavailable or budgetary resources are limited.
See also Attractiveness Bias, Baby-Face Bias, Mentol Model, Normal Distribution,
and Symmetry.
138 Unlvcr<;,,' PrinCIples 01 Design
I Also referred to as MAFA effect.
) The seminal work on the most average facial
appearance effect is ~AUractrve Faces are Only
Averageft by Judith H. langlois and Lori A.
Roggman, Psychological Science, 1990, vol. 1.
p. 115-121.
• See, for example, -Devek>pmental Stability,
DISease, and MedlCine- by Randy Thornhill
and Anders P. MJ;3ller, Biological ReVIeWS, 1997,
vol. 72, p. 497-548.
Source
'-----0 1st Generalion Composite
~
___________ - o 2nd Generation Composite-MAFA
~----oo l si Generation Composile
Source
The most average facial
appearance for a population is
also the most attractive. In this
population of four men and
four women, two generations
of composites were created to
demonstrate the effect. Unique
and idiosyncratic facial features
are rninlnl1zed and overall
symmetry is improved.
Most Average Facidl Appearance Effect 139


=== ENTRY: Normal Distribution (pp 71-71) ===

A term used to describe a set of data, that when plotted,
forms a symmetrical, bell-shaped curve1
Normal distributions result when many independently measured values of a vari-
able are plotted. The resulting bell-shaped curve is symmetrical, rising from a
small number of cases at both extremes to a large number of cases in the middle.
Normal distributions are found everywhere- annual temperature averages, stock
market fluctuations, student test scores-
and are thus commonly used to deter-
mine the parameters of a design.
In normal distribution, the average value of the variable measured is also the most
commonly occuring one. As the value for this variable deviates from the average,
its frequency of occurence diminishes in accordance with the area under the curve.
However, it is a mistake to conclude that the average is the preferred design para-
meter simply because it is the most common. Generally, a range across the normal
distribution must be considered in defining design parameters, since variance
between the average and the rest of the population translates to the variance the
design must accommodate. For example, a shoe designed for the average of a
population would fit only about 68 percent of the population.
Additionally, it is important to avoid trying to create something that is average in all
dimensions. A person who is average in one measure will not be average in other
measures. The probability that people will match the average in their population
group in two measures is approximately 7 percent; this falls to less than 1 percent
for eight measures. The common belief that average people exist and are the stan-
dard to which designers should design is called the "average person fallacy. " 2
Where possible, create designs that will accommodate 98 percent of the popula-
tion; namely, the first to the 99th percentile. While design considerations can be
expanded to accommodate a larger portion of the population, generally, the larger
the audience accommodated, the greater the cost. Consideration of the target
population is key. When deSigning specifically for a narrow portion of the popula-
tion (e.g., airline seats that will accommodate 98 percent of American males), it
is crucial to obtain the appropriate measurement data for this very specific group.
See also Convergence and Most Average Facial Appearance Effect.
140 Universal Principles of Design
! Also known as standard normal distribution,
Gaussian distnbution, and bell curve.
~ Anthropometric data drawn from The Measure
of Man and Woman by Alvin R. Tilley and
Henry Dreyfuss Associates, The Whitney
Library of Design, 1993.
Top
of Head
Wl
Chin
W2
Ll
W3
W4
Hips
W5
L
W6
Knee
Bottom
W7
of Foot
The measures at men and women are
normally distributed. The wide range
of measures across the distribution
illustrates the pl"Oblern of simply
designing for an average group, Note
that no Olle Inan or woman is repre-
sented by these measures- i.e., tllere
is no average person in reality.
34.13%
34.13%
Shoulders
1359%
13.59%
-10
.10
2.14%
2.14%
.1 27%
.\27%
-20
. 20
.003%
-40
-3D
.30
003%
. 40
Elbow
.1%
15.9%
84.1%
99.9%
99.997%
1%
50%
99%
male
female
male
62.6"
58.1"
69.1"
Wrist
6.3
7.6
8.7
12.5
12.5
14.4
10.4
9.3
11.4
Fingertip
6.6
6.0
7.5
15.2
13.8
16.7
14.7
13.3
16.6
Wl
5.6
5.2
6.1
W2 15.8
13.5
18.3
W3 10.3
8.8
12.2
W4
9.2
7.4
11.4
W5 11.4
11 .2
14.2
W6
3.7
3.2
4.1
W7
9.2
8.3
10.4
The normal distribution is represented
by a symmetric bell-shaped curve.
The four standard deviations repre-
sented by a below and above the
average reflect the normal percentages
found in the variability around the
average. Percentiles are indicated
along the bottom of the curve. Note
that in a normal distribution,
female
male
female
64.0
11
75.6"
69.8"
8.6
9.9
9.7
13.2
16.2
14.8
10.2
12.4
11 .2
6.9
8.4
7.8
15.4
18.4
16.9
15.1
18.0
16.4
5.7
6.7
6.3
WI
16.1
20.6
18.0
W2
10.4
14.1
12.1
W3
9.0
13.6
10.7
W4
14.6
16.9
16.8
W5
3.6
4.6
4.1
W6
9.5
11.7
11 .7
W7
approximately 68 percent of the popu-
lation falls within one standard devia-
tion of the average; approximately 95
percent of the population falls within
two standard deViations of the aver-
age; and approximately 99 pel'cent of
the population falls wiUlin tl1ree stan-
dard deviations of the average.
Norn-wl Distribution 141


=== ENTRY: Ockham's Razor (pp 72-72) ===

Given a choice between functionally equivalent designs,
tile simplest design should be selected, I
Ockham's razor asserts that simplicity is preferred to complexity in design. Many
variations of the principle exist, each adapted to address the particulars of a field
or domain of knowledge. A few examples include:
"Entities should not be multiplied without necessity,"-
William of Ockham
"That is better and more valuable which requires fewer, other circum-
stances being equal."-Robert Grosseteste
"Nature operates in the shortest way possible,"-Aristotle
"We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both
true and sufficient to explain their appearances."-
lsaac Newton
"Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler."
-Albert Einstein
Implicit in Ockham's razor is the idea that unnecessary elements decrease a
design's efficiency, and increase the probability of unanticipated consequences.
Unnecessary weight, whether physical, visual, or cognitive, degrades performance.
Unnecessary design elements have the potential to fail or create problems. There
is also an aesthetic appeal to the principle, which llkens the "cutting" of unneces-
sary elements from a design to the removal of impurities from a solution-the
design is a cleaner. purer result.
Use Ockham's razor to evaluate and select among multiple, functionally equivalent
designs. Functional equivalence here refers to comparable performance of a design
on common measures. For example, given two functionally equivalent displays-
equal in information content and readability-select the display with the fewest
visual elements. Evaluate each element within the selected design and remove as
many as possible without compromising function. Finally, minimize the expression
of the remaining elements as much as possible without compromising function.?
See also Form Follows Function, Mapping, and Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
142 Universal Prirlt.rples of Design
I Also known as Occams razor, law of parsi-
mony, law of economy, and principle of sim-
plicity. The term "Ockham's razor~ references
William of Ockham, a 14" century Franciscan
friar and logician who purportedly made abun-
dant use of the principle. The principle does
not actually appear in any of hIS extant writings
and, in truth, little is known about either the
origin of the prinCiple or its originator. See, for
example, "The Myth of Occam's Razor" by W.
M. Thorburn, Mind, 1918, vol. 27, p. 345-353.
"Make all visual distinctions as subtle as possi-
ble, but still clear and effective. ~ V'rsual
Explanations by Edward R. Tufte, Graphics
Press, 1998, p. 73.
Tile Yamaila Compact Sileni Electnc
Cello is a mlnlmalis! cello With only
those portions touched by the player
represented. Musicians can Ilear con-
cert-Quahty cello sound through head-
phones while creating little external
sound. or through an amplifier and
5peakers for public performances,
Tile cello can also be collapsed for
easy transport and stOiage.
1
,;;.
Image!>
Groups
Dir~ __
Ad ... ,,!! "'Ith lb Sqgu;h s..Mtloqt»
NqwI rod R,,!OII!W' Ssryi<m & Toob
JOOI Prm. Cog! Sluff
oNOO2 V$oglt · Seatdolng 2,..s9.9AO.685 web ~
WIlile oUler Internet search services
were racing to add advertising and ad
hoc functIons to then Web SItes,
Google kept lIs design Simple and effi-
Cient. The resuilis the best performing
and easiest to use sealch service on
the Web,
The Taburet M Stacking Stool is
strong, comlortable, and stackable.
It IS constructed from a single
piece of nlolcled wood and has
no extraneous elements,
O(.kh<lnl's Razor 143


=== ENTRY: Operant Conditioning (pp 73-73) ===

A technique used to modify behavior by reinforcing
desired behaviors, and ignoring or punishing
undesired behaviors l
Operant conditioning is probably the most researched and well known technique
used to modify behavior. The technique involves increasing or decreasing a partic-
ular behavior by associating the behavior with a positive or negative condition (i.e.,
rewards or punishments). Operant conditioning is commonly applied to animal
training, instructional design, video game design, incentive programs, gambling
devices, counseling, and behavioral therapy. It is also finding increased application
in artificial intelligence. There are three basic operant conditioning techniques:
positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement, and punishment.'
Positive reinforcement increases the probability of a behavior by associating the
behavior with a positive condition. For example, pulling the lever on a slot machine
results in positive visual and auditory feedback, and a possible monetary reward .
Negative reinforcement increases the probability of a behavior by associating the
behavior with the removal of a negative condition. For example, fastening a seat
belt in a car silences an annoying buzzer. Punishment decreases the probability of
a behavior by associating the behavior with a negative condition. For example,
touching a pOison mushroom in a video game reduces the score. Positive and
negative reinforcement should be used instead of punishment whenever possible.
Punishment should be reserved for rapidly extinguishing a behavior, or it should
not be used at all.
Reinforcement and punishment are administered after a behavior is performed one
or more times. When there is a clear and predictive relationship between the fre-
quency of a behavior and an outcome, behavior will be paced to do just what is
required to receive reinforcement or avoid punishment. When there is not a clear
and predictive relationship between the frequency of behavior and the outcome,
behavior wi tl be performed more frequently and will be more resistant to extinction
(i.e., the desired behavior will be less likely to stop). An optimal behavior modifica-
tion plan typically includes predictable reinforcement early in training (fixed ratio
schedules) and less predictable reinforcement later in the training (variable ratio
schedules).
Use operant conditioning in design contexts where behavioral change is required .
Focus on positive or negative reinforcement, rather than punishment whenever
possible. Use fixed ratio schedules of reinforcement early in training. As basic
behaviors are mastered, switch to variable schedules of reinforcement.
See also Classical Conditioning and Shaping.
144 Universal Principles of Design
, Also known as instrumental conditioning.
l The seminal work on operant conditioning is
The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental
Analysis by Burrhus F. Skinner, Appleton-
Century, 1938; a nice contemporary book on
the subject is Don't Shoot the Dog: The New
Art of Teaching and Training by Karen Pryor,
Bantam Doubleday Dell, 1999.
Tilis graph shows how reinforcement
strategies inf(uence the frequency
of behavior. Variable ratio schedules
provide reinforcement after a variable
number of correct responses. They
ultimately achieve the highest fre-
quency of behaIJiol ancl are useful
for maintaining behavior. Fixed ratio
sclledules provide reinforcement after
a fixecl number of correct responses.
They are useful for connecting the
reinforcement to the behaVior during
the early stages of learning.
The addictive nature of Video
games and gambling machines is
a direct result of their application
of operant conditioning.
In the game Black & White, the
nature of the cl18racters evolve to
become good, neutral, or evil based
on how their behaviors afe rewarded
and punished.
Variable Ratio
/
/
/
1UP
/
I
Time
SCORE 60
HIGH SCORE 105450
Fixed Ratio
Operant Conditioning 145


=== ENTRY: Orientation Sensitivity (pp 74-74) ===

A phenomenon of visual processing in wllich certain line
orientations are more quickly and easily processed and
discriminated than other line orientations.
The efficiency with which people can perceive and make judgments about the
orientation of lines is influenced by a number of factors. For example, the time
displayed on a standard analog clock can be quickly interpreted because the
numbers are positioned at 3D-degree increments around the center. The 30-
degree increment happens to correspond to the minimum recommended differ-
ence in line orientation required to be easily detectable; i.e., differences in line
orientation of less than 30 degrees require more effort to detect. Orientation sensi-
tivity is based on two phenomena that are observed in visual perception: oblique
effect and pop-out effect. I
The oblique effect is the ability to more accurately perceive and judge line orienta-
tions that are close to vertical and horizontal, than line orientations that are
oblique. For example, in tasks where people have to estimate the relative orienta-
tion of a line by any number of methods (e.g., redrawing from memory), the most
accurate judgments are for horizontal and vertical lines, and the least accurate
judgments are for oblique lines. The oblique effect is caused by a greater sensitiv-
ity of neurons to vertical and horizontal stimuli than to oblique stimuli. Additionally,
people tend to make judgments about line orientation that are biased toward the
nearest vertical or horizontal axis; lines oriented close to the vertical or horizontal
axis will often be perceived or recalled as truly vertical or horizontal. Designs in
which the primary elements are vertical or horizontal are also considered generally
more aesthetic than designs in which primary elements are oblique.'
The pop-Duteffect is the tendency of certain elements in a display to pop out as
figure elements, and as a result be quickly and easily detected. For example, in
tasks where people have to identify a target line against a background of lines of a
common orientation, the target line is easily detected when it differs from the
background lines by 3D degrees or more. The pop-out effect is caused by a
change in the visual stimuli sufficient to activate additional input neurons, which
then help to detect differences in line orientation and patterns. The effect is
strongest when combined with the oblique effect; it is easier to detect subtle
differences in the orientation of a target line against a background of vertical and
horizontal lines, than against a background of oblique lines.J
Consider orientation sensitivity in compositions requiring discrimination between
different lines or textures, or decisions based on the relative position of elements.
Facilitate discrimination between linear elements by making their orientation differ
by more than 30 degrees. In displays requiring estimates of orientation or angle,
provide visual indicators at 3D-degree increments to improve accuracy in oblique
regions. Use horizontal and vertical lines as visual anchors to enhance aesthetics
and maximize discrimination with oblique elements.
See also Closure, Constancy, Figure-Ground Relationship, and Good Continuation.
146 Universa l Principles of Design
t The seminal works on orientation sensitivity
include "On the Judgment of Angles and
Positions of Lines" by Joseph Jastrow,
American Journal of Psychology, 1893.
vol. 5, p. 214- 248; and "Perception and
Discrimination As a Function of Stimulus
Orientation: The "Oblique Effeel" in Man and
Animals" by Stuart Appelle, Psychological
Bulletin, 1972, vol. 78, p. 266·278.
, "An Oblique Effect in Aesthetics: Homage to
Mondrian 0872- 1944}" by Richard Latta,
Douglas Brain, and Brian Kelly, Perception,
2000, vol. 29(8). p. 981-987.
• See, for example, "Texture Segmentation and
Pop-Out from Orientation Contrast" by
Christoph Nothdurft, Vision Research, 1991,
vol. 31, p. 1073-1078.
Differences in line Orientation are most
easily detected when set against veril-
cal or honzontclllines.
a
•
<fl
270
"')
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
111111 11 /111111 1
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
'''''
a
"" •
60
100
270'
>20
2'''
?IO
180
150
, , , , , , ~ ~ ~ , , ~
" " " " " " " " " " " "
,,"""""""""""
,,""" " ~ "" """"
,,"""""""""""
,,"""""""""""
,,"""""""""""
""""""""""""
""""""""""""
""""""""""""
""""""""""""
""""""""""""
Standard analog clocks are easily read
because numbers are separated by 30
degrees. However, the same lime on a
twenty-four hour clock is more difficult
to read because numbers are separated
by only 15 degrees.
Systems that require precise
estimation of orientation and position
should be designed to accommodate
orientation sensitivity. For example,
radar-tracking displays should indicate
orientation by providing markers in
3D-degree increments or less.
Without the markers, estimates in
oblique regions of the display will
be prone to error.
Ortentalloll Sensitivity
147


=== ENTRY: Performance Load (pp 75-76) ===

The greater the effort to accomplish a task, tile less likely
the task will be accomplished successfully.'
Performance load is the degree of mental and physical activity required to achieve
a goal. If the performance load is high, performance time and errors increase, and
the probability of successfully accomplishing the goal decreases. If the perform-
ance load is low, performance time and errors decrease, and the probability of
successfu lly accomplishing the goal increases. Performance load consists of two
types of loads: cognitive load and kinematic load.2
Cognitive load is the amount of mental activity-
perception, memory, problem
solving-
required to accomplish a goal. For example, early computer systems
required users to remember large sets of commands, and then type them into the
computer in specific ways. The number of commands that had to be remembered
to perform a task was the cognitive load for that task. The advent of the graphical
user interface allowed users to browse sets of commands in menus, rather than
recalling them from memory. This reduction in cognitive load dramatically reduced
the mental effort required to use computers, and consequently enabled them to
become mass-market devices. General strategies for reducing cognitive load
include minimizing visual noise, chunking information that must be remembered,
using memory aids to assist in recall and problem solving, and automating compu-
tation- and memory-intenSive tasks.
Kinematic load is the degree of physical activity-
number of steps or movements,
or amount of force-
required to accomplish a goal. For example, the telegraph
required people to communicate letters one at a time through a series of taps on a
mechanical armature. The number of taps to communicate a message was the
kinematic load for that task. Samuel Morse designed Morse code to minimize
kinematic load by assigning the simplest codes to the most frequently occurring
letters; the letter E was expressed as dot, and the letter Q was expressed as the
longer dash dash dol dash. This approach reduced the physical effort (kinematic
load), dramatically reducing transmission times and error rates. General strategies
for reducing kinematic load include reducing the number of steps required to
complete tasks, minimizing range of motion and travel distances, and automating
repetitive tasks. 3
Design should minimize performance load to the greatest degree possible. Reduce
cognitive load by eliminating unnecessary information from displays, chunking
information that is to be remembered, providing memory aids to assist in complex
tasks, and automating computation-intensive and memory-intensive tasks. Reduce
kinematic load by reducing unnecessary steps in tasks, reducing overall motion
and energy expended, and automating repetitive tasks.
See also 80/20 Rule, Chunking, Cost-Benefit, Hick's Law, Fitts' law,
Mnemonic Device, and Recognition Over Recall.
148 Universal Principles of Design
, Also known as the path-of-Ieast-resistance
principle and principle of least effort.
2 The seminal works on performance load are
Cognitive Load During Problem Solving: Effects
on Learning by John Sweller, Cognitive
Science. 1988, vol. 12, p. 257- 285; "The
Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two:
Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing
Information" by George Miller, The
Psychological Review. 1956. vol. 63, p. 81-97;
and Human Behavior and The Principle of
Least Effort by George K. Zipf, Addison-Wesley,
1949.
1 "Frustrations of a Pushbutton World" by
Harold Thimbleby, Encyclopedia Britannica
Yearbook of Science and the Future, 1992, p.
202- 219.
p !~~a
a
'"
fib
fib
'fJ'f
'fJ'f
5,
(D
fib
(D
L--
'fJ'f
f:= -"-
I
(£
=-:
»
Modem slot machines no longel
require the pulling of a lever or the
inseli ion of coins to play. Inserting a
charge card and pressing a button IS
all that IS mqulred, though tile lever
continues to be retained as a usable
ornament. This reduction In kinematic
lood not only makes It easier to play
the slots, It makes it easier for casinos
to make money.
Remote keyless entry enables
people 10 lock and lJlllocl~ all doors
of a vehicle at the press of a
bulton-a dramatic reduction in
I~inematlc load.
I
Insert your
casino player's
CJ
card and push
tile button.
'fJ'f
..
(D
)
People can eaSily save then favorite
Internet destinations in all modern
browsers. This feature replaces the
more load-Intensive alternatives of
I·ememberillg destinations, or writing
them down.
The use of Universal Product Codes.
also known as bar codes. dramatically
red uces the performance load
associated with consumer transactions:
prod ucls no longer need price
tags, cashiers no langei need to
'type in prices. and inventory is
automatically updated.
'fJ'f 'fJ'f
fib
CJ
fib fib
Add P09'
:om
---.2..f".ganize
,
€> magazines
,
€> info design
,
€> references
,
€> cool sites
,
€> lech reference
,
€> shopping
,
8> furniture
,
€> recipes
,
€> Muhimedia
8> Hardware Developers
""
Software Developers
""
Toolbar Favorites
® Project Management Glossary
® Web Redesign
® Tutorials> Javascript
® Fonts Order Form
9
Performance Load 149
Performa nce Versus
Preference
The designs that help people perform optimally are often
not the same as the designs that people find most desirable.
Designer and managers often extrapolate from the business maxim "the customer
is always right" a mistaken idea that "the user is always right." This is a dangerous
misapprehension, since in reality what helps a person periorm well and what people
like are not the same. For example, the Dvorak keyboard is estimated to improve
typing efficiency by more than 30 percent, but has failed to rise in popularity because
people prefer the more familiar QWERTY keyboard. If you asked people if they wculd
like to be able to type 30 percent faster with fewer errors, most wculd answer in the
affirmative. Despite this, more than 50 years have passed since the introduction of the
Dvorak keyboard, and it is still more of a novelty item than a practical alternative.1
This underscores an important lesson for designers: the reasons people prefer one
design to another is a combination of many factors, and may have nothing to do
with performance. Is the design pleasing to look at' Does it compete with long-
standing designs or standards of use? Does it contribute to the wen being or self-
esteem of the user? The balance between performance and preference must be
taken into careful consideration in the development of the design requirements. If
a superbly performing design is never bought or used because people (for what-
ever reason) do not prefer it to alternatives, the performance benefits are moot.
Conversely, if a well-liked design does not help people perform at the level
required, the preference benefits are moot.
The best way to balance performance and preference correctly in design is to
determine accurately the relative importance of each. While surveys, interviews,
and focus groups try to find out what people want or like, they are unreliable indi-
cators of what people will actually do, especially for new or unfamiliar designs.
Additionally, people are poor at discriminating between features they like, and fea-
tures that actually enhance their periormance, they commonly prefer deSigns that
periorm less well than available alternatives, and incorrectly believe that those
designs helped them aChieve the best performance.'
The best method of obtaining accurate performance and preference requirements
is to observe people Interacting with the design (or a similar design) in real con-
texts. When this is not feasible, test using structured tasks that approximate key
aspects of the way the deSign will be used. It is important to obtain preference
information in context while the task is being performed, and not afterward. Do not
rely on reports of what people say they have done, will do, or are planning to do in
the future regarding the use of a design; such reports are unreliable.
See also Aesthetic-Usability Effect, Control, Development Cycle,
Flexibility-Usability Tradeoff, and Hierarchy of Needs.
150 Unlvers,11 PlIlluples of Destg,u
j See, for example, "Performance Versus
Preferel1Ce~ by Robert w, Bailey, Proceedmgs
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
37th Annual Meeting, 1993, p. 282-286.
1 See, for example, MMcasuring Usa bihty ~
Preference \IS. Performa nce ~ by Jakob Ntelsen
and Jonathan Levy. CommumcallOt1S o( the
ACM, 1994, vol. 37(4), p.66--75


=== ENTRY: Picture Superiority Effect (pp 77-77) ===

Pictures are remembered better than words. 1
It is said that a picture is worth a thousand words, and it turns out that in most
cases, this is true. Pictures are generally more easily recognized and recalled than
words, although memory for pictures and words together is superior to memory for
words alone or pictures alone. For example, instructional materials and technical
manuals that present textual information accompanied by supporting pictures
enable information recall that is better than that produced by either the text or pic·
lures alone. The picture superiority effect is commonly used in instructional design,
advertising, technicat writing, and other design contexts requiring easy and accu·
rate recall of information.2
When information recall is measured immediately after the presentation of a series
of pictures or words, recall performance for pictures and words is equal. The pic·
ture superIOrity effect applies only when people are asked to recall something after
more than thirty seconds from the time of exposure. The picture superiority effect
is strongest when the pictures represent common, concrete things versus abstract
things, such as a picture of a flag versus a picture depicting the concept of free-
dom, and when pictures are distinct from one another, such as a mix of objects
versus objects of a single type.
The picture superiority effect advantage increases further when people are casually
exposed to information and the exposure time is limited. For example, an adver·
tisement for a clock repair shop that includes a picture of a clock will be better
recalled than the same advertisement without the picture. People not interested in
clock repair who see the advertisement with the picture will also be better able to
recall the brand if the need for clock repair service arises at a later time. The
strength of the picture superiority effect diminishes as the information becomes
more complex. For exampte, people are abte to recall events from a story pre·
sented as a silent movie as well as events from the same story read as text.3
Use the picture superiority effect to improve the recognition and recall of key infor·
maticn. Use pictures and words together, and ensure that they reinforce the same
information for optimal effect. Pictures and words that conflict create interference
and dramatically inhibit recall. Consider the inclusion of meaningful pictures in
advertising campaigns when possible, especially when the goal is to build com·
pany and product brand awareness.
See also Advance Organizer, Iconic Representation, Serial Position Effects, and
VOn Restorff Effect.
I Also known as pICtorial superiority effect.
1 The seminal work on the piclure ~uper1or ity
effect is "Why Are Pictures Easier to Recall
than Words?" by Allan Paivlo, T. B. Rogers,
and Pad ric C. Smythe. Psychuflomic Science,
1968, vol. 11(4). p. 137 138.
1 See, for example, ~ CondI!lonS for a Picture.
Superiority Effect on Consumer Memory- by
Terry L Childers and MIChael J. Houston,
Journal of Consumer Research, 1984, vol. 11.
p. 643-654.
(
Clinics-Psychiatric ~
Allied Psychiatric Heallhcare
Wean help.
DR-JOHN DREYFUSS
DR. KAREN FULLER
DR. AuSllA RUDO!."
16lt Cyfl(1!SS Blvd. Sulle 100
295·555·HElP
IWICiIAHlIl!ll.(IiM'IAN
I OII~",""
1~1~1lO1i
tlIN1CALPSYl.'IlIflllIISlSZ12WJ.I .... S .. 18I
181·!M-'1'~
MAlNS!1If£TI'SYCllIAllIICIlfAlIIiCo\lf comll
4:>4M>onSl
M~!IO).I
JlLW IQIIlIlNSWUINiSS crHIElI
nnw.--
1U&JW.
HEWIlIIlOOl:PSYOtWlIY17TUo\.SlIlIIl
1U!lblill11
i'$VOU,ll1C$l'f.I:WISIS
0(144 1......, 101 $c."" sa. lOll
l'!ISo!6S4W
DfI. JIl \'OffiJI, PSYDWIIST
17m &r.u./I~ s.!jIIl
TIJ1 Wl17I'
4J'IIW'NmSll.lm)"L ~Io till
IC.~U!.H
(
Clocks-Repair
The Ctock Doc
we make housacalls
• anlique clocks '
• vintage pocket watches ·
• grandfather clocks'
• newer models'
We can fix them alii
call for a free estimate
1211 South Harrisburg
295·555·1010
~S"'-JlllYi2!>"""
"""'..." """""
Holden
Clocks
8.
Gifts
GZDW _,
... _SIo 1011
IUfl'SCrxxslll w..SI
IN rtf: NClIJ lY: JU;!I)"""-
1fISON'$CiJIl(.li AH!IWR£
ml _
s..np,s. "h1
.ow IlliltEII'S BfSl coo: IlNoII
IBQW"-I~
USUl'SCWKI1IlI521ll'-';
Clinics - Clocks
167
ProfesSional sales and repair
We service all brands
same-day service available for most jobs
Meganls Watch Shop
344 West Haywood
295·555·1212
tIllill's tIntiqulls
Clock Repair and Maintenam.:e
We buy and.sell vintage timepieces
Pocket Watches · Grandfather Clocks
Gifts · Hand Painted Ceramics
Collectibles · Glassware
The most Imique selection ;11 tuum
311 East 7th Street
295·555·6121
tMYflISU/XlJIY 1IM/l'1ftf5111 fin!
MAlHSI~fI1d.OCI:smMoI"
MUM~UU~~IlU'M! mOUI! $IW!'
!ItA! tlOC6ANQSN.u:K$
II!I:;q..",,,,,,,,,II.,...,1I'
h1.WNIll(lOlIMU'IlClS...wlillIS
~IIXJW ..... , .. , ....... ,.Sta- 1919
1l0.4ltl)N£W IIMEI'IE«S mp..
I'fI'i(CIIl!,lNj ClOClS N«IG~!$
",W,.....1Id
P(1{$~"""l)J$curxs'II w..,SI
""'.""
III.ItlCL~lms...-
(U;lflI;l)U~
""" .....
QUllKYll1IlSt.NIlQ.IIIXS
.:;HI AIQI!IIII11t: CQIOPe
.,lw ....... ~
fIQIIONTi&oIfln~
-.;tIlUMflINIII
01 W.-.. "- WttIl s.. 1l1li
SlUXONo.oocslll"""""SI
SUSlQCU!aUlI.' _1111
111;101:
.IW ....
.... , .......
IM-SAWo\SIIN'
ItI3w .... ~w.
mASrMnM'lMttOVf
lQ'!~Z1IlrWIsI
YAN/MIMHOGflS
'lOOw_Sp .. SIoll1
]I!",",*"'"
ll:H .. " ...
WlUSWONOlMI\l WI\IIoTN(!! 022 .. 100
:.= (
Clocks- RDtall
)
181·S'h-G'l 1 ~
~
. ~~~:..:..
___ ~
___ ~~~~
7l!'l.555-1)1!1
"'~""
1Il·5!6-1II10
1B2.'j/D.4t21
-""S!6-4ut
~~119
"'~
lIl·!i5!tl!lll
"'~""
"""=
~!0!6ml
"'~D
.........
2!!o-~"I
~
IIlJi6.DI
~""'"
1fl}Wi;llfoli
~!6S·lI!61
~I1ID
JASON'S CLOCKS AND MORE
• Great gifts for all occasions'
• If we don't have it. .. we'li gel it •
• We repair clocks and watches'
-----------
I Mention Ihls ad and receive I
I_~~~f~r~~se_~
Open Sunday
All Ma;or Credil Cards Accepted
4241 Warm Springs, Sto. 252
295.555·6423
JllaLYNSGl'I$IOIlAumt_
.lNt/IffR tTN«'5 Gfl1 t.NIl MOIl
!0IIf""w..''-'-'
HUMYlNloIQ IlMII'fCfS0f.6~
I'JF's'MlN!lUI\AQJ.II%SlllffSZIOiIt 1t.w11
IlMASGIffS ...... uIloUlofi
\'( (lilt. ClOCKS !\NO GillS M/OWoII ...
"' .. -
"""""
, ... ,"'"
.",,,'"
m.~I111
&S2>mt


=== ENTRY: Progressive Disclosure (pp 78-78) ===

A strategy for managing information complexity in which
only necessary or requested information is displayed at
any given time.
Progressive disclosure involves separating information into multiple layers and only
presenting layers that are necessary or relevant. It is primarily used to prevent
information overload, and is employed in computer user Interfaces, instructional
materials, and the design of physical spaces,l
Progressive disclosure keeps displays clean and uncluttered and helps people
manage complexity without becoming confused, frustrated, or disoriented. For
example, infrequently used controls in software interfaces are often concealed in
dialog boxes that are invoked by clicking a More button. People who do not need
to use the controls never see them. For more advanced users, the options are
readily available. In either case. the design is simplified by showing only the most
frequently required controls by default, and making additional controls available
on requesV
Learning efficiency benefits greatly from the use of progressive disclosure.
Information presented to a person who is not interested or ready to process it is
effectively noise. Information that is gradually and progressively disclosed to a
learner as they need or request it is better processed and perceived as more
relevant. The number of errors is significantly reduced using this method, and
consequently the amount of time and frustration spent recovering from errors is
also reduced.'
Progressive disclosure is also used in the physical world to manage the perception
of complexity and actiVity. For example, progressive disclosure is found in the
design of entry points for modern theme park rides. Exceedingly long lines not only
frustrate people in line, but also discourage new people from the ride. Theme park
designers progressIvely disclose discrete segments of the line (sometimes supple-
mented with entertainment), so that no one, in or out of the line, ever sees the line
in its entirety.
Use progressive disclosure to reduce information complexity, especially when peo-
ple interacting with the design are novices or infrequent users. Hide infrequently
used controls or information, but make them readily available through some simple
operation, such as pressing a More button. Progressive disclosure is also an effec-
tive method for leading people though complex procedures, and should be consid-
ered when such procedures are a part of a design.
See also Chunking, Errors, Layering, and Performance Load.
154 Un .... N .. al Prmclples of Design
I The seminal applied work on progressive dIS-
closure is the user interiace for the Xerox Star
computer. See "The Xerox 'Star'; A
Retrospective~ by Jeff Johnson and Teresa L.
Rooorts, William Verplank, David C. Smith,
Charles Irby, Marian Beard, Kevin Mackey, In
Human Computer Intcrac/lon: Toward the Year
2fXX) by Ronak:l M. Baecker, Jonathan Gruelln,
William A. S. Buxton. Saul Greenberg, Morgan
Kaufman Publishers, 1995, p. 53-70.
; A common mistake is to presenl all avaIlable
inforrnaUon and options at once with the
rationale that it reduces kinematic load. SII'lCe
progressive disclosure affects only infrequently
used elements and elements for whICh a per·
son may not be ready, It Will generally have
minimal effect on kinematic load, COnversely,
presenting everything at once WIll Significantly
increase cogniUve load.
1 See, for example, "Training Wheels in a User
Interiace~ by John M. Carroll and caroline
Carrithers, Commumcalions of the ACM, 1984,
vol. 27(8), p. 800-806; and The Numbcrg
Funnel by John M. Carroll, MIT Press. 1990.
Tl1eme park rides often have very long
Hnes-so long that seeing the hnes III
thell entirety would scare away /Tlony
would-be viSitors. Tllerefore, modern
theme [)ark rides progressively diS·
rlose the length of the line, so Ihal
oilly small segments of the line can
be seen from any particular vantage
point. Additional distractions are !"lro-
vlded in the form of VIdeo screens,
slgnage. and partial glimpses 01
people on the nde.
Low walls allow VISItors near the
end of the Ime to see they are
gettmg close 10 the end.
High walls prevent viSitors
at the beginning of the line
from seeing the length of the line.
Video screens entertain
visitors while they wait.
Wmdows allow visitOfS
at the end of the line
to see the ride.
Status signs
indicate wait time.
ProglMslve Disclosure 155


=== ENTRY: Prospect-Refuge (pp 79-79) ===

A tendency to prefer environments with unobstructed views
(prospects) and areas of concealment and retreat (refuges).
People prefer environments where they can easily survey their surroundings and
quickly hide or retreat to safety if necessary. Environments with both prospect and
refuge elements are perceived as safe places to explore and dwell, and conse-
quently are considered more aesthetic than environments without these elements.
The principle is based on the evolutionary history of humans, reasoning that envi-
ronments with ample prospects and refuges increased the probability of survival
for pre-humans and early humans.'
The prospect-refuge prinCiple suggests that people prefer the edges, rather than
middles of spaces; spaces with ceilings or covers overhead; spaces with few
access points (protected at the back or side); spaces that provide unobstructed
vieYolS from multiple vantage points; and spaces that provide a sense of safety and
concealment. The preference for these elements is heightened if the environment
is perceived to be hazardous or potentially hazardous.
Environments that achieve a balance between prospects and refuges are the most
preferred. In natural enVironments, prospects include hills, mountains, and trees
near open settings. Refuges include enclosed spaces such as caves, dense
vegetation, and climbable trees with dense canopies nearby. In human-created
environments, prospects include deep terraces and balconies, and generous use
of windows and glass doors. Refuges include alcoves with l()INered ceilings and
external barriers, such as gates and fences:'
The design goal of prospect-refuge can be summarized as the development of
spaces where people can see without being seen. Consider prospect-refuge in the
creation of landscapes, residences, offices, and communities. Create multiple van-
tage poinls within a space, so that the internal and external areas can be easily
surveyed. Make large, open areas more appealing by using screening elements to
create partial refuges with side- and back-barriers while maintaining clear lines of
sight (e.g., shrubbery, partitions). Balance the use of prospect and refuge ele-
ments for optimal effect-e.g., sunken floors and ceilings that open to larger
spaces enclosed by windows and glass doors.
See also Defensible Space, Savanna Preference, and Wayfinding.
156 Univt!lsal Princlplos 01 DeSign
I The seminal work on prospect-refuge theory is
The Exrx:rience o( LaodSCiJpe by Jay Appleton,
John Wiley & Sons, 1975.
, See. for example. Tile Wflght Space: Pattern
and Meaning in Frank Lloyd Wflghls Houses
by Grant Hildebrand, University of Washington
Press, 1991.
ThiS seclion of an Imaginary cafe high·
lights m(lny of the pi actJud applica-
tions of tile prospect-refuge PI inclple.
The entry IS, separated from tile Il1lellor
by a greel1ng stalJon, and the l..:ellll1g IS
lowered to create a temporary refuge
for warhng patrons. As the Intenor I"
Low ceiling
Raised floor
Low ceiling
Divider between
entry and main area
accessed, the ceiling raises and the
room opens up WIth multiple. clear
hnes of Sight. A bell area is set against
the far wall with a raised floor and
lowered ceilings, creatmg i:l protected
perch to view l!ltClior and exterior
areas. Higl1backed booths and partial
Divider between
dining areas
High ceiling
scree>ns plOvlue lefuge WIth minimal
Impediment to prospect Windows are
hnted or mirrored. allowlI1g patrons to
sUivey the exlenOf WIthout being seen.
Siliubbery surlOunds the extenOI as a
prilcilcal Clnd symbolic bmriel. prevent-
ing oulslders flOm geltlng 100 close.
Tinted windows
High-backed booths
Shrubbery


=== ENTRY: Prototyping (pp 80-80) ===

The use of simplified and incomplete models of a design
to explol-e ideas, elaborate requirements, refine specifica-
tions, and test functionality.
Prototyping is the creation of simple, incomplete models or mockups of a design.
It provides designers with key insights into real-world design requirements, and
gives them a method to visualize, evaluate, learn, and improve design specifica-
tions prior to delivery. There are three basic kinds of prototyping: concept. throw·
away, and evolutionary,l
Concept prototyping is useful for exploring preliminary design ideas quickly and
inexpensively. For example, concept sketches and storyboards are used to develop
the appearance and personality of characters in animated films well before the
costly process of animation and rendering take place. This approach helps comM
municate the concepts to others, reveals design requirements and problems, and
allows for evaluation by a target audience. A common problem with concept proto·
typing is the artificial reality problem, the plausible presentation of an implausible
design. A good artist or modeler can make most any design look like it will work.
Throwaway prototyping is useful for collecting information about the functionality
and performance of certain aspects of a system. For example, models of new
automobile designs are used in wind tunnels to better understand and improve
the aerodynamics of their form. The prototypes are discarded once the needed
information is obtained. A common problem with throwaway prototyping is the
assumption that the functionality will scale or integrate properly in the final design,
which of course it often does not.
Evolutional}' prototyping is useful when many design specifications are uncertain or
changing. In evolutionary prototyping. the initial prototype is developed. evaluated.
and refined continuously until it evolves into the final system. Design requirements
and specifications never define a final product, but merely the next iteration of the
design. For example, software developers invariably use evolutionary prototyping to
manage the rapid and volatile changes in design requirements. A common problem
with evolutionary prototyping is that designers tend to get tunnel vision, focusing on
tuning existing specifications, rather than exploring design alternatives.2
Incorporate prototyping into the design process. Use concept prototypes to develop
and evaluate preliminary ideas, and throwaway prototypes to explore and test
design functionalities and performance. Schedule time for prototype evaluation and
iteration. When design requirements are unclear or volatile, consider evolutionary
prototyping in lieu of traditional approaches. Consider the common problems of
artificial realities, scaling and integration, and tunnel vision when evaluating proto-
types and design alternatives.
See also Feedback Loop, Satisficing, and Scaling Fallacy.
158 Universal Principles 01 Design
, See, lor example, Human-Computer
Interaction by Jenny Preece, et aI., Addisofl-
Wesley, 1994, p. 537- 563: The Art of
Innovation by Tom Kelley and Jonathan
Uttman, Doubleday, 2001; and Serious Play:
How the Worlds Best Companies Simulate to
Innovate by Michael Schrage, Harvard
Business School Press, 1999.
~ Evolutionary prototyping is often contrasted
with Incremental prototyping, which is the
decomposition 01 a design In\o multiple stages
that are then delivered one at a lime. They are
combined here because they are invanably
combined In practice.
The function and elegance of the Olex
JUicer clearly demonstrate the benefits
of prolotYPlllg In the design process.
Simple two-dImensional prototypes
were used to study mechanical
motion, three-dimensional foam proto-
types were used to study for rn and
assembly, and functional
breadboard models were used to
study usability and working stresses.
PrO!otyping 159


=== ENTRY: Proximity (pp 81-81) ===

Elements that are close together are perceived to be more
related than elements that are farthel- apart.
The principle of proximity is one of several principles referred to as Gestalt princi-
ples of perception. It asserts that elements close together are perceived as a single
group or chunk, and are interpreted as being more related than elements that are
farther apart. For example, a simple matrix of dots can be interpreted as consisting
of multiple rows, multiple columns, or as a uniform matrix, depending on the rela-
tive horizontal and vertical proximities of the dots.l
The grouping resulting from proxim ity reduces the complexity of designs and rein-
forces the relatedness of the elements. Conversely, a lack of proximity results in
the perception of multiple, disparate chunks, and reinforces differences among
elements. Certain proximal layouts imply specific kinds of relationships, and
should be considered in layout design. For example, connecting or overlapping
elements are commonly interpreted as sharing one or more common attributes,
whereas proximal but non-contacting elements are interpreted as related but
independent.2
Proximity is one of the most powerful means of indicating relatedness in a design,
and will generally overwhelm competing visua l cues (e.g., similarity). Arrange ele-
ments such that their proximity corresponds to their relatedness. Ensure that labels
and supporting information are near the elements that they describe, opting for
direct labeling on graphs over legends or keys. Locate unrelated or ambiguously
related items relatively far from one another.
See also Chunking, Performance Load, and Similarity.
160 Universal Principles of Desigll
I The seminal work on proximity is "Untersuch-
ungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt, II" [Laws of
Organization in Perceptual Forms! by Max
Wertheimer, Psychologische Forschung, 1923.
vol. 4, p. 301-350, reprinted in A Source Book
of Gestalt Psychology by Willis D. Ellis (eel.),
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1999, p. 71- &13. See
also Principles of Gestalt Psychology by Kurt
Koffka, Harcourt Brace, 1935.
> Euler circles and Venn diagrams (methods
of illustrating the relationships betWBen sets
of things in logic and mathematics) utilize
this principle.
o o
o
o
o o
o o o
000
000
000
Proximity betweell the circles influ-
ellces 110W they are grouped- as
columns, 3 square group of circles,
or rows.
000
000
000
OOC18@
Circles A and B al'e perceived as inde~
pendent and sharing no attnbutes.
Circles C and 0 are perceived as par-
tially dependent and sharing some
attributes. Circle F is perceived as
dependent on Circle E and sharing all
of Its attributes.
TillS rendering of a sign at Big Bend
National Park has undoubtedly sent
many hikers in unintended directions
(two hikers for certain). The proxirnity
between unrelated words (e.g., Chlsos
and South) lends itself to miSinterpre-
tation. Positioning the related words
closer together corrects the problem.
t COLIMA
©
.. CHISOS
SOUTH
©
TRAIL
BASIN
RIM ...
Window controls are often placed all
the center console between seats. The
lack of proximity between the controls
and the window rnakes it a poor
design. A better location would be on
trle door itself.
IGIJI
I~
\
©
t COLIMA TRAIL
.. CHISOS BASIN
SOUTH RIM ...
©
Proximity 161


=== ENTRY: Readability (pp 82-82) ===

The degree to which prose can be understood, based on
the complexity of words and sentences.
Readability is determined by factors such as word length, word commonality, sen-
tence length, number of clauses in a sentence, and number of syllables in a sen-
tence. It is an attribute that is seldom considered---either because designers are
not sensitive or aware of its importance, or because of the common belief that
complex information requires complex presentation. In fact, complex information
requires the simplest presentation possible, so that the focus is on the information
rather than the way it is presented.
For enhanced readability, omit needless words and punctuation, but be careful not
to sacrifice meaning or clarity in the process. Avoid acronyms, jargon, and untrans-
lated quotations in foreign languages. Keep sentence length appropriate for the
intended audience. Generally, use active voice, but consider passive voice when
the emphasis is on the message and not the messenger. When attempting to
produce text for a specific reading level, use published readability formulas and
software applications designed for this purpose.
A variety of readability formulas and software applications are available to assist
designers in producing prose with specific readability levels. The readability rating
is usually represented in the form of school levels ranging from 1st to 12th grade
and college. While different tools may use slightly different approaches for calcu-
lating readability, they all generally use the same combination of core readability
factors mentioned above.!
Use these formulas to verify that the textual components of a design are at the
approximate reading level of the intended audience. However, do not write for the
formulas. Readability formulas are primitive guides and should not outweigh all
other considerations. For example, more sentences per paragraph may increase
readability for lower-level readers, but frustrate readability for more advanced
readers who are distracted by the lack of continuity. Simple language is preferred,
but overly simple language obscures meaning.2
Consider readability when creating designs that involve prose. Express complex
material in the simplest way possible. Follow guidelines for enhancing readability,
and verify that the readability level approximates the level of the intended audience.]
See also Legibility and Ockham's Razor.
162 Universal Principles of Design
, Fry's Readability Graph (right) is one of many
readability formulas. Other popular measures
include Flesch Formula, Dale-Chall formula,
Farr-Jenkins-Palerson formula, Kincaid
Formula, Gunning Fog Index, and Unsear
Write Index.
" "Use [readability formulas] as a guide after you
have written, but not as a pattern before you
write. Good writing must be alive; don·t kill it
with systems." The Technique of Clear Writing
by Robert Gunning, McGraw-Hili, 1968.
3 For additional writing guidelines, see The
Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. and E.
B. White, Allyn & Bacon; 4th edition, 2(XXl
Average Number of Syllables per 100 Words
25.0
110
114
118
122
126
130
134
138
142
146
150
154
158
162
166
170
20.0
16.7
~ 14.3
1:' 12.5
0
11.1
'!:
INVALID
8 10.0
~ 9.2
:u
8.3
0.
~
7.5
"
7.1
u c
6.7
J'l
c
6.3
"
UJ
5.6
a
5.5
:u
5.3
.D
E
5.0
~
4.8
z
"
4.5
""
i"
4.3
"
42
~ 4.0
3.8
3.7
APproXimate r radl
Leve,1 -L
I
6th
r
'
t
I
·i--
! . t--+nJ · i
I
i
I
I
._-
rT-rr-·r-j
I
I It '-1
I
18th
Jtn
I
I
I
l
I
I
10th
J th
I
11th
- 1
,
I
I
I
I
College
---+
+
INVALID
I
--I
3.6
110
114
118
122
126
130
134
138
142
146
150
154
158
162
166
170
Edward Fry's Readability Grapll
1. Randomly select three sample
passages from a text.
2. Count 100 words starting at the
beginning of these passages (count
proper nouns, but not numbers).
3. COllnt the number of sentences
in each lOO-word passage, estimat-
ing the length of the last sentence
to the nearest 1/lOth.
4. Count the total number of syllables
in each 1CX).word passage.
5. Calculate the average number
of sentences and average number
of syllables for the lOO-word pas-
sage. If a great deal of variability is
found, sample additional passages.
6. Tile area 01 intersection on the
graph between the nurnber of
sentences and average number
of syllables indicate the estilllated
gl·ade level. Invalid regions indicate
that a reading level could Ilot
be estimated.
Sample text written at a college
reading level. In the first 100 words
of this passage there are 187
syllables and almost six sentences.
Chicken pox, or varicella, is an infec-
tious disease usually occurring in young
children. Chicken pox is believed to be
caused by the same herpes virus that
produces shingles. Chicken pox is highly
communicable and is characterized by
an easily recognizable rash consisting
of blisterlike lesions that appear two to
three weeks after infection. Usually
there are also low fever and headache.
When the lesions have crusted over,
the disease is believed to be no longer
communicable; however, most patients
simultaneously exhibit lesions at differ-
ent stages of eruption. Chicken pox
Sample text written at a 4th grade
reading level. In the first 100 words
of this passage there are 137
syllables and almost twelve sentences.
Not too long ago, almost everyone got
chicken pox. Chicken pox is caused by
a virus. This virus spreads easily. The
virus spreads when an infected person
coughs or sneezes. People with chicken
pox get a rash on their skin. The rash
is made up of clear blisters. These
blisters are very itchy. It is hard not to
scratch them. The blisters form scabs
when they dry. Sometimes these scabs
cause scars. Many people with chicken
pox must stay in bed until they feel
better. Until recently, almost all children
in the U.S. got chicken pox between
the ages of 1 and 10. In 1995, the Food
is usually a mild disease requiring little
and Drug Administration approved a
treatment other than medication to
vaccine that keeps the virus from spread-
relieve the troublesome itching, but care
ing. Today, most people will never get
must be taken so that the rash does
chicken pox because of this vaccine.
nol become infected by bacteria.
Readahilily 163


=== ENTRY: Recognition Over Recall (pp 83-83) ===

Memory for recognizing things is better than memory for
recalling things.
People are better at recognizing things they have previously experienced than
they are at recalling those things from memory. It is easier to recognize things
than recall them because recognition tasks provide memory cues that facilitate
searching through memory. For example, it is easier to provide the correct answer
for a multiple-choice question than it is for a fill-in-the-blank question because
multiple-choice questions provide a list of possible answers; the range of search
possibilities is narrowed to just the list of options. Short answer questions provide
no such memory cues, so the range of search possibilities is much greater. i
Recognition memory is much easier to develop than recall memory. Recognition
memory is obtained through exposure, and does not necessarily involve any mem-
ory about origin, context, or relevance. It is simply memory that something (sight,
sound, smell, touch) has been experienced before. Recall memory is obtained
through learning, usually involving some combination of memorization, practice,
and application. Recognition memory is also retained for longer periods of time
than recall memory. For example, the name of an acquaintance may be difficult to
recall, but is easily recognized when heard.
The advantages of recognition over recall are often put to good use in the design
of interfaces for complex systems. For example, early computer systems used a
command line interface, which required recall memory for hundreds of com-
mands. The effort associated with learning the commands made computers diffi-
cult to use. The contemporary graphical user interface, which presents commands
in menus, allows users to browse the possible options, and select from them
accordingly. This eliminates the need to have the commands in recall memory, and
greatly simplifies the usability of computers.
Decision-making is also strongly influenced by recognition. A familiar option is
often selected over an unfamiliar option, even when the unfamiliar option may be
the best choice. For example. in a consumer study, people participating in a taste-
test rated a known brand of peanut butter as superior to two unknown brands,
even though one of the unknown brands was objectively better, as determined by
earlier blind taste tests. Recognition of an option is often a sufficient condition for
making a choice.2
Minimize the need to recall information from memory whenever possible. Use
readily accessible menus, decision aids, and similar devices to make available
options clearly visible. Emphasize recognition memory in training programs, and
the development of brand awareness in advertising campaigns.
See also Exposure Effect, Serial Position Effects, and Visibility.
164 Universal Prim Iples of Design
I The seminal applied work on recognition over
recall is the user interface for the Xerox Star
computer. See "The Xerox 'Star': A
Retrospective" by Jeff Johnson and Teresa L.
Roberts, William Verplank, David C. Smith,
Charles Irby, Marian Beard, Kevin Mackey, in
Human Computer Interaction: Toward the Year
2fXXJ by Ronald M. Baecker, Jonathan Grudin,
William A. S. Buxton, Saul Greenberg, Morgan
Kaufman Publishers, 1995, p. 53-70.
, Note that none of the participants had previ-
ously bought or used the known bfand. See
"Effects 01 Brand Awareness on Choice for a
Common, Repeat-Purchase Product" by
Wayne D. Hoyer and Steven P. Brown, Journal
of Consumer Research, 1990, vol. 17, p.
141- 148.
e ,
e
".
e ,
.. , 11
e
f1
fl.-
f1
tllll
t
f
ft
gpl
g
9
H[.
gz.
gun .. 1 J:
h -) m ·d·
ha<~l ·11
he
h.is
imCl.
111
t
in
j(
r:l_
~
Id,
e"
h,
Ie
lin
111
101
101 J
lo( J
1
10<
II'.
If
'p
1pr
s
mal
mak
man
rnes
mbl
!II
mkstl:
more
mv
nawl.
niC'
nm
nroff
od
pas
:l
chfn,
past
p,
Pl' n
pro
ps
pi
pwd
.].llOl
,
h
Early computers used comrnand-line
lnteliaces, WlllCh fCqulred recall
memory fOl" hundreds ot commands.
Granhical lIser interfaces eliminated
111e need to recall \lle cortlmands
by presenting them in menus.
rl1is innovalion leveraged the human
capacity for recognition over recall.
and dral nallcally simplified the
usability of computers.
Recognition Over Recall
165


=== ENTRY: Redundancy (pp 84-84) ===

Tile use of more elements than necessary to maintain the
performance of a system in the event of failure of one or
more of the elements.
System failure is the failure of a system to achieve a goal-e.g., communicate a
message, maintain a structural load, or maintain operation. It is inevitable that
elements within a system will fail. It is not inevitable, however, that the system as
a whole fails. Redundancy is the surest method of preventing system failure.
There are four kinds of redundancy: diverse, homogenous, active, and passive,l
Diverse redundancy is the use of multiple elements of different types (e.g., use of
text, audio, and video to present the same information). Diverse redundancy is
resistant to a single cause of failure, but is complex to implement and maintain.
For example, high-speed trains often have diverse redundancy in their braking
systems-one electric brake, one hydraulic brake, and one pneumatic brake. A
single cause is unlikely to result in a cascade failure in ali three braking systems.
Homogenous redundancy is the use of multiple elements of a single type (e.g.,
use of multiple independent strands to compose a rope). Homogenous redun-
dancy is relatively simple to implement and maintain but is susceptible to single
causes of failure- i.e., the type of cause that results in failure in one element
can result in failure of other redundant elements. For example, a sharp edge that
severs one strand of a rope can sever others.
Active redundancy is the application of redundant elements at all times (e.g.,
using multiple independent pillars to support a roof). Active redundancy guards
against both system and element failure-i.e., it distributes loads across all ele-
ments such that the load on the each element and the overall system is reduced.
Active redundancy also allows for element failure, repair, and substitution with
minimal disruption of system performance_
Passive redundancy is the application of redundant elements only when an active
element fails (e.g., using a spare tire on a vehicle in the event of a flat tire).
Passive redundancy is ideal for noncritical elements, but it will result in system
failure when used for elements critical to system operation. Passive redundancy
is the simplest and most common kind of redundancy.
Use diverse redundancy for critical systems when the probable causes of failure
cannot be anticipated. Use homogenous redundancy when the probable causes
of failure can be anticipated. Use active redundancy for critical systems that must
maintain stable performance in the event of element failure or extreme changes
in system load. Use passive redundancy for noncritical elements within systems,
or systems In which performance interruptions are tolerable. The four kinds of
redundancy should be used in combination to achieve highly reliable systems.
See also Factor of Safety, Modularity, Structural Forms, and Weakest Link.
166 UnlVer';,ll Principles of Oe<oigtl
1 See, lor example, Why Buildings Fall Down;
How StructufCs Fail by Matthys Levy and Mario
Salvadori, W.W. Norton. 1992; and "Achieving
Reliability: The Evolution of Redundancy In
American Manned Spacecraft" by James E.
Tomayko, Journal of the British Interplanetary
Sode/y. 1985. vol. 38, p. 545-552.
Parts
1 fiberglass cow
I canvas cape
1 tower crane
1 fabricated steel base
4 fabricated steel hoof plates
2 steel cables
a bolts
1 steel cross member
2 fabricated double U-bolts
2 steel guy wires
3 eyebolts
Purpose
protect the city from danger
flap in the wind
provide a bovine perch
display cow above crane railings
attach cow to base
attach cow to base
attach hoof plates to base
attach base to crane
attach cross member to base
attach base to crane
attach cape to cow
The Super Cow entry 111 the Houston
Cow Parade 200] had a unique
design specification- it was to Sit atop
a thirty-story tower crane for the
duration of hUrricane seasoll. Since
the consequences of Super Cow
laking fligl1t III high winds could be
grave, vallOUS forms of reclundancy
were applied to keep him attached.
Despite many severe thunderstorms
(wind gusts In excess of 60 MPH),
Super Cowexpenenced no failure.
damage, or unintended flights during
his four-month stay on the crane.
Fiberglass Cow
Bolts
Guy Wire
Steel Cras..,; Member
TO'Ner Crane
•
o
000
Fabricated
Steel Hoof Plates
Fabricated
Steel Base
Guy Wire
Fabricated Double U-Bolts
-rl-.....,.,
Reulllldiincy 167


=== ENTRY: Rule of Thirds (pp 85-85) ===

A technique of composition in which a medium is divided
into thirds, creating aesthetic positions for the primary
elements of a design. 1
The rule of lhirds is a technique derived from the use of early grid systems in
composition. It is applied by dividing a medium into thirds both vertically and hori~
lontally, creating an invisible grid of nine rectangles and four intersections. The
primary element within a design is then J,Xlsitioned on an intersection of the grid.
The asymmetry of the resulting composition is interesting to look at. and generally
agreed to be aesthetic.
The technique has a klyal follaMng in design circles due to its use by the Renaiss-
ance masters and its rough relationship to the golden ratio. Although dividing a
design into thirds yields a ratio different from the golden ratio (i.e., the 2J3 section ==
0.666 versus goklen ratio: 0.618), the users of the technique may have decided
that the simplicity of Its application compensated for its rough approximation.
The rule of Ihirds generally works well, is easy to apply, and should be considered
when composing elements of a design. When the primary element is so strong as
to imbalance the composition, consider centering the element rather than using
the rule of thirds-especially when the strength of the primary element is rein ~
forced by the surrounding elements or space. If the surrounding elements or
space do not reinforce the primary element, use the rule of thirds and add a sec-
ondary element (known as a counterpoint) to the opposing intersection of the pri·
mary element to bring the composition to balance. In designs where there is a
strong vertical or horiZontal element, it is common practice to align the element
along one of the grid lines of corresponding orientatian.l
See also Alignment, Golden Ratio, and Symmetry.
168 UrllVcrsal Plln(;lples of DeSIgn
\ Also known as goldell grid rule.
A nice introducUon to compositional concepts
is Design and Composition by Nathan
Goldstein, Prentice-Hall, 1997.


=== ENTRY: Satisfici ng (pp 86-86) ===

It is often preferable to settle for a satisfactory solution,
rather than pursue an optimal solution'
The best design decision is not always the optimal design decision. In certain
circumstances, the success of a design is better served by design decisions that
roughly satisfy (Le., satisfice), rather than optimally satisfy, design requirements.
For example, in seeking for the proverbial needle in a haystack, a satisficer would
stop looking as soon as a needle is found; an optimizer would continue to look for
all possible needles so that the sharpest needle could be determined. There are
three kinds of problems for which satisficing should be considered: very complex
problems, time-limited problems, and problems for which anything beyond a satis-
factory solution yields diminishing returns.z
Complex design problems are characterized by a large number of interacting vari-
ables and a large number of unknowns. In working with such problems, a satisficer
recognizes that the combination of complexity and unknowns makes an optimal
solution unlikely (if not impossible). The satisflCer, therefore, seeks a satisfactory
solution that is just better than existing alternatives; the satisflCer seeks only to incre-
mentally improve upon the current design, rather than to achieve an optimal design.
Time-limited problems are characterized by time frames that do not permit ade-
quate analysis or development of an optimal solution. In cases where optimality is
secondary to urgency, a satisficer selects the first solution that satisfactorily meets
a given design requirement. Note that satisficing should be cautiously applied in
time-limited contexts, especially when the consequences of a suboptimal solution
can have serious consequences.'
There are cases in which a satisfactory solution is better than an optimal solu-
tion- i.e., solutions beyond the satisfactory yield diminishing returns. Determining
when satisfactory is best requires accurate knowledge of the deSign requirements,
and accurate knowledge of the value perceptions of the users. A satisficer weighs
this value perception in the development of the deSign specification, ensuring that
optimal specifications will not consume design resources unless they are both
critical to success, and accorded value by users.~
Consider satisficing as a means of making design decision when problems are
complex with many unknowns, when problems need to be solved within a narrow
time frame, and when developing design reqUirements and specifications. Generally,
do not accept satisficed solutions that are inferior to previous or existing solutions.
In time-limited contexts, consider satisficing only when the limited timelines are
truly fixed , and the consequences of low-quality design and increased risk of
failure are acceptable.
See also 80120 Rule, Chunking, Cost-Benefit, and Iteration.
170 Universal PrinCiple!; of DeSign
I Also known as best IS the enemy of the
good principle.
J The seminal works on satisficing are Models of
Man, John Wiley &. SoIls, 1957; and The
ScteneeS of the ArtificJa/, MIT Press, 1969.
both by Herbert A. Simon.
J In many time-limited contexts, the lime limits
are artifICial (I.e .. set by management), where-
as the COnseqL.lellCes of low-quality design and
system failure are real. See, for example,
C(uclal Decisions: Leadership in Po/iCymaking
and Crrsis Management by Irving Janis, Free
Press, 1989.
j For example. dBSlgnefS at Swatch realized that
watches of increasing accuracy were no longer
of value to consumers-i.e., accuracy to WIthin
one minute a day was accurate enough. This
"good enough" standard allowed the deSigners
of Swatch to focus their eHorts on style and
cost reduction. rather lhan on further op~rnjz­
ing the timekeeping of their watches.


=== ENTRY: Sava n na Preference (pp 87-87) ===

A tendency to prefer savanna-like environments to otller
types of enVIronments. I
People tend to prefer savanna-like environments-open areas, scattered trees,
water, and uniform grassiness-to other natural environments that are simple, such
as desert; dense, such as jungle; or complex, such as mountains. The preference
is based on the belief that early humans who lived on savannas enjoyed a survival
advantage over humans who lived in other environments. This advantage ultimately
resulted in the development of a genetic predisposition to favor savanna environ-
ments that stitl manifests itself today. It may be no coincidence that the parks,
resorts, and golf courses of the world all resemble savannas-they may renect an
unconscious preference for the look and feel of our east-African ancestral home,l
The characteristics of savannas that people prefer include depth, openness, uniform
grassy coverings, and scattered trees, as opposed to obstructed vielNS, disordered
high complexity, and rough textures. The preference is found acrpss all age ranges
and cultures, though it is strongest in children and grows 'Neaker with age. This find-
ing is thought to corroborate the evolutionary origin of the preference; j,e" humans
are increasingly influenced by knowledge, culture, and experience with other
environments as they grow older, which interferes with innate preferences,
This causal explanation has been criticized as recent evidence suggests that early
humans lived in a variety of environments (e.g. closed-canopy woodlands), but
evidence for the existence of the preference is strong. For example, in an experiment
where people were presented with images of savannas, deciduous forests, conifer-
ous forests, rain forests, and desert environments, lush savannas were consistently
preferred over other choices as a place to live or visit. The theory that the preference
is related to the savanna's perceived resource richness and temperate climate is
supported by the finding that the least preferred environment is the arid desert
landscape.!
People have a general landscape preference, independent of culture, for savanna-
like or park-like environments. Consider the savanna preference in the design of
landscapes, advertiSing, and any other design that involves the creation or depiction
of natural environments. The preference is strongest in young children. Therefore,
consider savanna-like environments in the design of settings for children's stories
and play environments.
See also Archetypes, Mimicry, and Prospect~Refuge.
172 Umver .. al Pnlluples of DeSign
I Also known as savanna hypothesiS.
- The seminal article on tile savanna preference
is "Development 01 Visual Preference lor
Natural Environments" by John D. Balling and
John H. Falk1ll, Envlfonment and BehaVIOr,
1982, vol. }l1, p. 5 28.
• See, for example, -Tt'le Biological Basis for
Human Values of Nature" by Stcphen R.
Kellerl, in The Bioph//IB HypothesiS by Stephen
R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (c(hIOrsl.
Island Press, 1993.


=== ENTRY: Scaling Fallacy (pp 88-88) ===

A tendency lo assume that a system that works at one
scale will also work at a smaller or larger scalel
Much is made of the relative strength of small insects as compared to that of
humans. For example, a leafcutler ant can carry about 50 times its weight; where-
as an average human can only carry about half its weight. The standard reasoning
goes that an ant scaled to the size of a human would retain this strength-weight
advantage, giving a 200-pound ant the ability to lift 10,000 pounds, In actuality,
however, an ant scaled to this size would only be able to lift about 50 pounds,
assuming il could move at all. The effect of gravity at small scales is miniscule, but
the effect increases exponentially with the mass of an object. This underscores the
basic lesson of the scaling fallacy-systems act differently at different scales. There
are two basic kinds of scaling assumptions to avoid when growing or shrinking a
design: load assumptions, and interaction assumptions.'
Load assumptions occur when designers scale a design by some factor, and
assume that the working stresses on the design scale by that same factor, For
example, initial designs of the Trident 2 missile, designed to be launched from
submarines, underestimated the effects of water pressure and turbulence during
launch, The anticipated estimates for pressure and turbulence were based largely
on the Trident 1 missile, which was much shorter and roughly half the weight of
the Trident 2. When the specifications for the Trident 1 were scaled to meet the
specifications 'for the Trident 2, the working stresses on the missile did not scale by
the same factor as its physical specification. The result was multiple catastrophic
failures in early tests, and a major redesign of the missile.3
Interaction assumptions occur when designers scale a design, and assume that
the way people and other systems interact with the design will be the same at
other levels of scale. For example, the design of very tall buildings involves many
possible interactions that do not exist for buildings of lesser size-problems of
evacuation in the case of fire, people seeking to commit suicide or base-jump off
of the roof, symbolic target for terrorist attacks, to name a few. These kinds of
interaction effects are usually an indirect consequence of the design, and there-
fore can be difficult to anticipate and manage.
The best way to avoid the scaling fallacy is to be aware of the tendency to make
scaling assumptions. Therefore, raise awareness of load and interaction assump-
tions in the design process. Verify load assumptions through the use of careful cal-
culations, systematic testing, and appropriate factors of safety. Minimize incorrect
interaction assumptions through careful research of analogous designs, and moni-
toring of how the design is used once implemented.
See also Factor of Safety, Feedback Loop, Modularity, and Structural Forms.
174
Unlvl;:!r~al Principles 01 DeSign
I Also known as cube law and law of sizes.
1 The seminal work on scaling is Dialogues
Concerning Too New Sciences by Gahleo
Galilei. Prometheus Books [reprint), 1991.
) "Design Flaw Seen as Failure Cause In Trident
2 Tests
n by Andrew Rosenthal, New York
Times, August 17, 1989, p. 1.
1
10.1
10-3
10 '
The scaling fallacy IS nowhere more
apparent 111an with fIIghl. For
example, al very small and very large
scales, flapping 10 Uy is not a viable
strategy. At very small scales, wings
are too small to etrectively displace
all molecules. AI very large scales.
the effeels 01 gravity are 100 great
for napping to work-a painful lesson
learned by many eally pioneers of
Iluman night. The lesson is lilat
designs can be effective at one scale,
and completely Ineffective al another.
Tile images lrom small to large:
aeroplankton simply float about in a1f;
baby spiders use tiny web salls to
parachute; insects nap to fly: birds
flap to fly: humans flap but do noilly.
SCfllIf1g Fallacy 175


=== ENTRY: Self-Similarity (pp 89-89) ===

A property in which a form is made Lip of pal'ts similar to
tile wllole or to one another.
Many forms in nature exhibit self-similarity, and as a result it is commonly held to
be an intrinsically aesthetic property. Natural forms tend to exhibit self-similarity
at many different levels of scale, whereas human-created forms generally do not.
For example, an aerial view of a coastline reveals the same basic edge pattern,
whether standing at the water's edge or viewed from low-Earth orbit. Although
varying levels of detail are seen, the same pattern emerges-the detail is simply
a mosaic of smaller versions of the whole,l
Naturally occurring self-similarity is usually the result of a basic algorithmic
process called recursion. Recursion occurs when a system receives input, modi-
fies it slightly, and then feeds the output back into the system as input. This
recursive loop results in subtle variations in the form- perhaps smaller, skewed,
or rearranged-
but is still recognizable as an approximation of the basic form.
For example, a person standing between two mirrors facing each other yields an
infinite sequence of smaller reflections of the person in the opposing mirror.
Recursion occurs with the looping of the light between the two mirrors; self-similar-
ity is evident in the successively smaller images in the mirrors.
The ubiquity of self-similarity in nature hints at an underlying order and algorithm,
and suggests ways to enhance the aesthetic composition of human-created forms
and perhaps their structural composition as well. Consider, for example, the self-
similarity of form and function found in the compound arch structures of the
Roman aqueducts and the flying buttresses of gothic cathedrals, structures that
are beautiful in form , and have rarely been equaled in their structu ral strength
and longevity. The self-similarity in these structures exists at only a few levels of
scale, but the resulting aesthetic and structural integrity are dramatic.
Consider self-similarity in all aspects of a design: story plots, visual displays, and
structural compositions. The reuse of a single, basic form to create many levels of
meta forms mimics nature's tendency towards parsimony and redundancy. Explore
the use of basic, self-similar elements in a design to create interesting organiza-
tions at multiple levels of scale.
See also Archetypes, Ockham's Razor, Similarity, and Symmetry.
176
Ullivel~a l Pril1ciple'> of Design
, The seminal work on self-similarity is Frac/al
Geometry of Nature by Benoit B. Mandelbrot,
W. H. Freeman & Company, 1988.
- ,
)
~' ,
'-.-
~ .-:
} " .
\.
,-,..: ,.. " ~
•
•
•
• ...
#
i>
~::--. f,


=== ENTRY: Serial Position Effects (pp 90-90) ===

A phenomenon of memory in Wllich items presented at
the beginning and end of a list are more likely to be
recalled Ulan items in the middle of a list.
Serial position effects occur when people try to recall items from a list; items at the
beginning and end are better recalled than the items in the middle. The improved
recaU for items at the beginning of a list is called a primacy effect. The improved
recall for items at the end of a Jist is called a recencyeffect.1
Primacy effects occur because the initial items in a list are stored in long-term
memory more efficiently than items later in the list. In lists where items are rapidly
presented, the primacy effect is weaker because people have less time to store the
initial items in long-term memory. In lists where items are slowly presented, the
primacy effect is stronger because people have more time to store the initial items
in long-term memory.:.!
Recency effects occur because the last few items in a list are still in working mem-
ory, and readily available. The strength of the recency effect is unaffected by the
rate of item presentation, but is dramatically affected by the passage of time and
the presentation of additional information. For example, the recency effect disap-
pears when people think about other matters for thirty seconds after the last item
in the list is presented. It is important to note that the same is not true of the pri-
macyeffect, because those items have already been stored in long-term memory.]
For visual stimuli, items presented early in a list have the greatest influence; they
are not only better recal1ed, but influence the interpretation of later items. For
auditory stimuli, items late in a list have the greatest influence. However, if multiple
presentations of information are separated in time, and a person must make a
selection decision soon after the last presentation, the recency effect has the
greatest influence on the decision. These effects also describe a general selection
preference known as order effects~first and last items in a list are more likely
to be selected than items in the middle (e.g., the order of presentation of candi-
dates on a ballot).~
Present important items at the beginning or end of a list (versus the middle) in
order to maximize recall. When the list is visual, present important items at the
beginning of the list. When the list is auditory, present important items at the end.
In decision-making situations, if the decision is to be made immediately after the
presentation of the last item, increase the probability of an item being selected by
presenting it at the end of the list; otherwise, present it at the beginning of the list
See also Advance Organizer, Chunking, Classical Conditioning, and
Operant Conditioning.
178 Universal Pllnclple<; of Dc,>lgl l
I The seminal work on senal position eHects is
Memory: A Contribution to Experimental
Psychology by Hermann Ebbinghaus, Teachers
College. Columbia University, 1885 (translated
by H. A. Ruger and C. E. Bussenues, 1913).
• "Storage Mechanisms in Recall" by Murray
Glanzer, in Tile Psyc/lOlogy of Learning and
Motivation by G. H. Bower and J. T. Spence
(eds.). 1972, AcademIC Press. vol. 5, p.
129-193.
• "Two Storage Mechanisms in Free Recail
M by
Murray Glanl-er and Anita Cunitz, Journal of
Verba! Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1966,
vol. 5. p. 351-360.
• See "FormIng Impressions of PersonalilyM by
Solomon E. Asch, Journal of Abnormal and
Social PSYC/JOlogy, 1946, vol. 41, 258-290;
and "First Guys Finish First; The Eflects of
Ballot POSition on Election Outcomes" by
Jennifer A. Steen and Jonathan GS Koppeli.
PresentatJon at the 2001 Anllual Meetmg of
the American Political Science ASSOCiation,
San FranCISCo, August 30--September 2, 2001.
Items at the beginning and end of
a list Of a sequence al'e easier to
remember than Items 111 the middle.
tf recall is attempted immediately
after the presentation of the list, tile
pnmacy effect and recency effect are
roughly equal in strength (word list 1),
If recall is attempted more than 30
seconds after the presentation of
the list, the primacy effect maintains
whereas tile recency effect quickly
diminishes (word list 2).
In a classic experiment, students
who read tile Itrst sentence rated
John more favorably than students
who read the second sentence.
Tile early words in the list had more
overalllnlluence on impressions
than did later 'MJrds.
In addition \0 benefits reaped from
the bad design of the butterfly ballol,
tile Republican ticket of 2000 also
benefited from an order effect-
being first on the ballot is estimated
Lo be wortll between l percent and
4 percent of Ihe vote.
.8
Word list 1
Word Usl 2
bird
.7
lO-second delay
cat
.6
dog
ro
fISh
fish
irl
.5
snake
snake
'" a
lizard
lizard
& .4
frog
frog
:0
spider
spider
Jll
.3
rabbit
rabbit
e
30-second delay
D-
C(NI
C(NI
.2
horse
horse
goat
goat
.1
chicken
chicken
0
mouse
mouse
I
2 3
4
5 6
7
8
9 toll 12 13 t4 15
sheep
sheep
Serial Position
John was intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, and envious.
John was envious, stubborn, critical, impulsive, industrious, and intelligent.
,
IIfmW. 'AWI~ U[H[JAl[ lErnUN
•
amDlolllAUOt GIHll.Iol mcnGN
, .
1'NM'(AQlC~~
HlUlIOItII (OWIT"( 1_
IIOfUIIIfIIl. _
NCII'[IIIIUI._
lRH'UBUCAN)
GfORGE W. BUSH ... 0Ct<'"
,-
0
lR~FOAMI
OICK t H£NEY ._ ... _ . '
0 -.
PAT BUCHANAN .......... ,
IO{MOCRAnC)
ElDlAFDSTER ·_ .......
AlGORE • ..-xr
. -
0
ISQtIAIJSn
JOE UEBEIIMAH . __
0 _ .
DAVID McREYNOLDS . _
w_
/UBERTAftIAN)
MARYCAl HOWS· .... _
..
-~-
K,f.BAYBIIDWHE. _
,-
0
~o
ARrOUVlEl ..... _'
ICONSTffilnONj
VlUI'tUIIIENI
"'_ ....... _
......
0 -. IIDWARD P1tIWPS ._
..
lGRHN)
J. t URns R!AlIER ........ _.,
.._ ... _ ... _ ...... 1
AAlPH NADU ·,"","""
.-
0
MI .. "" ....... I
WINONAlItDllKE. wt<l ... "",,,,
IWOAKERSWOALD)
0 _
..
MONlCAMDDRtHEAD· ..... ,
ISOClAUSTWORKEAS)
GlORIA lit IIIVA ·voa ... _ ..
JAMES II,uRIS . .....",
n_
o
MARGAlIfT IROWE · __
WRlTt·1N tANDlDAlE
(NAllJIIAlLAWI
10_ ... _
... __
..
....-....... -.. __ ......
JOHNHAGEUH._
,,-
0
NAlCOLDHAB£Il· ...........
I TURN PAGETD COImNUf VOTING :>
Serial PO!'iI!1on Effects 179


=== ENTRY: Shaping (pp 91-91) ===

A technique used to teach a desired behavior by reinforcing
increasingly accurate approximations of tile behavior,'
Complex behaviors can be difficult to teach. Shaping is a strategy whereby
complex behaviors are broken down into smaller, simpler subbehaviors, and then
taught one by one. The behaviors are reinforced (e.g., given food), and ultimately
chained together to achieve a desired result. For example, to teach a mouse to
press a lever, the mouse is first reinforced to move close to the lever; then
reinforced only when it makes contact with the lever; and eventually only when
it presses the lever.'
t,'-:-,,,, W
~(.ir:a.-""'"!if ~
Moving
---:---.
~, -,"Pf"
V",\'l.
>. )'>
Touching
Pressing
Often, shaping occurs without awareness. For example, video games use shaping
when initial game levels require simple inputs in order to "beat" the level (obtain
the reinforcement), and then require increasingly difficult controller actions to
master higher levels of the game. Salespeople use a form of shaping when they
offer a prize to come to their location, provide food and drink to discuss the sale,
and then offer a discount for making a purchase decision that day. Each action
toward the goal behavior (making the sale) is reinforced.
During shaping, behaviors that have nothing to do with the desired behavior can
get incidentally reinforced. For example, when training a mouse to press a lever,
the mouse may incidentally press a lever with one foot in the air. The reinforcement
for the lever press may also inadvertently reinforce the fact that the foot was in the
air. This behavior then becomes an integrated, but unnecessary component of the
desired behavior; the mouse lifts its foot whenever it presses the lever. The devel-
opment of this kind of superstitious behavior is common with humans as well.
Use shaping to train complex behaviors in games, simulations, and learning envi-
ronments. Shaping does not address the "haws" or "whys" of a task, and should,
therefore, primarily be used to teach rote procedures and refine complex motor
tasks. Shaping is being increasingly used to train complex behaviors in artificial
beings, and should be considered when developing adaptive systems?
See also Classical Conditioning and Operant Conditioning.
180 Universal Principles of Design
I Also known as approximation conditioning and
conditioning by successive approximations.
1 The seminal work on shaping is The Behavior
of Organisms: an Experimental Analysis by
8. F. Skinner, Appleton-Century, 1938. An
excellent account of Skinner's early research
and developmenl is "Engineering Behavior:
Project Pigeon, World War II, and the
Conditioning of B. F. Skinnerw by James H.
Capshew, Technology and Culture, 1993,
vol. 34, p. 835-857.
1 See, lor example, Robot Shaping: An
Experiment in Behavior Engineering by Marco
Dorigo and Marco Colombetti, MIT Press. 1997.
Project Pigeon
Project Pigeon was a classified
research-and-development program
during World War II. It was developed
at a time when electronic guidance
systems did not exist, and the only
compensation for the inaccuracy of
bombs was dropping them in quantity.
This ingenious application of shaping
would have dramatically increased the
accuracy of bombs and decreased
civilian casualties. Despite favorable
performance tests, however, the
National Defense Research Committee
ended the project-it seems they
couldn't get over the idea that pigeons
would be guiding their bombs.
1. Pigeons were trained to peck al
targets on aerial pholograplls.
Once iI cel lain level of profiCiency
was obtained, pigeons were jacketed
and mounted InSide tubes.
2 The pigeons in their tubes were
Inc;erled Into the nosecone of the
bomb. Each nosecone used three
pigeons tn a type of vottng system,
whereby the pigeon pecks of
two birds in agreement would
overrule the errant pigeon pecks
of a Single bird.
3. Sealed in the bomb, the pigeons
could see through glass lenses in
the nosecone.
4. Once the bomb was !eleased, the
pigeons would begin pecking at
their view of the target. Their
pecks shifted the glass lens off-
center, which adjusted the bomb's
tail surfaces and, correspondingly,
tts trajectory.
~
~@
1
I
2
3
4
,
,
,
-------
I ,
- >,
-~ -
,
.- - - - -
,
I
/
--,
, ,
,
,
,
- - - --
> - , ,
-:: -,-
"
, ,
- -, , , ,
Shaping 181


=== ENTRY: Signal-to-Noise Ratio (pp 92-92) ===

The ratio of relevant to irrelevant information in a display. The
highest possible signal-to-noise ratio is desirable in design.
All communication involves the creation, transmission, and reception of informa-
tion. During each stage of this process, the form of the information-the signal-
is degraded, and extraneous information-
noise-is added. Degradation reduces
the amount of useful information by altering its form. Noise reduces clarity by
diluting useful information with useless information. The clarity of information
can be understood as the ratio of remaining signal to added noise. For example,
a graph with no extraneous etements woutd have a high signal-to-noise ratio
whereas, a graph with many extraneous elements would have a low signal-la-noise
ratio. The goal of good design is to maximize signal and minimize noise, thereby
producing a high signal-to-noise ratio.!
Maximizing signal means clearly communicating information with minimal degra-
dation. Signal degradation occurs when information is presented inefficiently:
unclear writing, inappropriate graphs, or ambiguous icons and labels. Signal clarity
is improved through simple and concise presentation of information. Simple
designs incur minimal performance loads, enabling people to better focus on the
meaning of the information. Signal degradation is minimized through research and
careful decision-making. For example, failing to use the correct type of graph to
present a certain kind of data can fundamentally distort the meaning of the infor-
mation. It is therefore important to make good design decisions at the outset,
testing when necessary to verify design directions. Emphasizing key aspects of the
information can also reduce signal degradation-e.g., highlighting or redundantly
coding important elements in a design.
Minimizing noise means removing unnecessary elements, and minimizing the
expression of necessary elements. It is important to realize that every unnecessary
data item, graphic, line, or symbol steals attention away from relevant elements.
Such unnecessary elements should be avoided or else eliminated. Necessary ele-
ments should be minimized to the degree possible without compromising function.
For example, the expression of lines in grids and tables should be thinned, light-
ened, and possibly even removed. Every element in a design should be expressed
to the extent necessary, but not beyond the extent necessary. Excess is noise.
Seek to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio in design. Increase signal by keeping
designs simple, and selecting design strategies carefully. Consider enhancing key
aspects of information through techniques like redundant coding and highlighting.
Use well-accepted standards and guidelines when available to leverage conventions
and promote consistent implementation. Minimize noise by removing unnecessary
elements, and minimizing the expression of elements.
See also Alignment, Layering, Ockham's Razor, and Performance Load.
182 Universal Pflnclpl(!$ of Design
1 The seminal works on sJgnal-to-noise ratio in
information design are" A Decision-Making
Theory of Visual Detection" by Wilson P.
Tanner Jr. and John A. Swets, Psychological
Review. 1954, vol. 61. p. 401-409; and Visual
Display of Quantitative Information by Edward
R. Tufte, Graphics Press. 1983.
TllL~ Slgnal-to-nOlse ratIo of eactlof
Illesc representations orl tile leflls
rrnpmved l1Y removrng elements lila!
ALL OTHER 13.1
MOZZARELLA 30.6
do not r.onvey rnl0lltlatlon, rlluII!1ll/mg
the expressron 01 rcrmllllltlg elf'rnents,
and l1rghligl1ling esst"'nllnllllfoll1l;:sl lon.
OTHER AMERICAN 8.8
....
~OTHER ITALIAN 8.7
All Other 13.1
Other
American
S.S
Other Italian 8.7
1997
U.S. CHEESE
PRODUCTION
% BY TYPE
r:-.' ...
SWISS 2.8
Mozzarella
30.6
\997
U.S. Cheese
Production
% by Type
SWISS 2.8
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
'"
z
~ 960
<li 940
... 920
:;; 900
Z 880
3860
-'
:E
CHEDDAR 36.0
SOYBEANS
PRODUCTION
HARVESTED ACREAGE
Billions of Bushels
Millions of Acres
2.69
68.1
2.74
71.3
2.65
72.5
2.76
72.5
2.89
73.2
REGULAR ICE CREAM, U.S.
95
96
97
98
YEAR
99
960
:II1il6::.11t 940
920
900
880
B60
00
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
869
T
1'l95
Cheddar
36.0
Soybeans
Production
Harvested Acreage
Billions of Bushels
Millions of Acres
2.69
68.1
2.74
71.3
2.65
72.5
2.76
72.5
2.89
73.2
Regular Ice Cream, U.S.
Millions ot Gallons
B84
I r I 1 1
1996
1997
1998
1999
2C(X)
Year
Slgn~I-lo-NfJlst:' RallO 183


=== ENTRY: Similarity (pp 93-93) ===

Elements tilat are silllilar are perceived to be more related
tilan elements that are dissimilar.
The principle of similarity is one of several principles referred to as Gestalt princi~
pies of perception. It asserts that similar elements are perceived as a single group
or chunk, and are interpreted as being more related than dissimilar elements. For
example, a simple matrix comprising alternating rows of dots and squares will be
interpreted as a set of rows only, because the similar elements group together to
form horizontal lines. A complex visual display is interpreted as having different
areas and types of information depending on the similarity of color, size, and shape
of its elements; similar elements are interpreted as being relevant to one another, '
The grouping resulting from similarity reduces complexity and reinforces the relat-
edness of design elements. Conversely, a lack of similarity results in the perception
of multiple, disparate chunks, and reinforces differences among the elements.
Certain kinds of similarity work better than others for different situations. Similarity
of color results in the strongest grouping effect; it is strongest when the number
of colors is smail, and is decreasingly effective as the number of colors increases.
Similarity of size is effective when the sizes of elements are clearly distinguishable
from one another, and is an especially appropriate grouping strategy when the
size of elements has additional benefits (e.g., large buttons are easier to press).
Similarity of shape is the weakest grouping strategy; it is best used when the
color and size of other elements is uniform, or when used in conjunction with
size or color.2
Use similarity to indicate relatedness among elements In a design. Represent ele-
ments such that their similarity corresponds to their relatedness, and represent
unrelated or ambiguously related items using different colors, sizes, and shapes.
Use the fewest colors and simplest shapes possible for the strongest grouping
effects, ensuring that elements are sufficiently distinct to be easily detectable.
See also Chunking, Mimicry, and Self-Similarity.
I The seminal work on similarity is
"Untersuchungen l.(Jr lehre von der Gestalt,
II" [l aws of OrganlwlJon In Perceptual Forms!
by Max Wertheimer. Psyclmlogische
Forschung. 1923, vol. 4. p. 301 350.
reprinted In A Source Book of Geslalt
Psycholagyby WillIS D. ElliS (ed.). Routledge &
Kegan PaUl, 1999, p. 71-88. See also
PnncipJes of Gastalt PsycllOlOgy by Kurt
Koffka, Harcourt Brace, 1935.
Note that a significant portion 01 the population
is color blind, limiting the strategy of using
color alone. Therefore. consider uSing an
additional grouping strategy when using color.
C)C)C)C)C)
C) c=J C)
Oc=JO
o o
ThiS remote control uses color. size,
and shape to group functions. Note
lile relationship between the antiCI-
pated frequency or use of the buttons
and their relative size and shape.
SImilarity among elemellts Influences
how they are grouped
Ilere by color,
size, and shape. Note Ihe strenglh of
color as a grouping strategy relative \0
size and shape.
Similarity is commonly used in
camoullage. For example, the mimic
octopus can assume the color.
pattern, and approximate form of
one of Its fiercest predators-the
highly poisonous sole rish-as well
as many other marine organisms.
Simllallty 185


=== ENTRY: Storytelling (pp 94-94) ===

A method of crealing imagery, emotiorls, and understand-
ing of events through an interaction between a storyteller
and an audience.
Storytelling is uniquely human. It is the original method of passing knowledge from
one generation to the next, and remains one of the most compelling methods
for richly communicating knowledge. Storytelling can be oral, as in the trad itional
telling of a tale; visual, as in an information graph or movie; or textual, as in a
poem or novel. More recently, digital storytelling has emerged, which involves
telling a story uSing digital media. This might take the form of a computerized slide
show, a digital video, or educational software. A storyteller can be any instrument of
information presentation that engages an audience to experience a set of events. j
Good storytelling experiences generally require certain fundamental elements.
While additional elements can be added to further augment the quality of a story
or storytelling experience, they can rarely be subtracted without detriment. The
fundamental elements are:
Setting- The setting orients the audience, providing a sense of time and
place for the story.
Characters- Character identification is how the audience becomes
involved in the story, and how the story becomes relevant.
Plot- The plot ties events in the story together, and is the channel through
which the story can flow.
Invisibility- The awareness of the storyteller fades as the audience focuses
on a good story. When engaged in a good movie or book, the existence of
the medium is forgotten .
Mood-
Music, lighting, and style of prose create the emotional tone of
the story.
Movement-
In a good story, the sequence and flow of events is clear and
interesting. The storyline doesn't stall.
Use storytelling to engage an audience in a design, evoke a specific emotional
response, or provide a rich context to enhance learning. When successfully
employed, an audience will experience and recall the events of the story in a personal
way-
it becomes a part of them. This is a phenomenon unique to storytelling.
See also Framing, Immersion, and Wayfind ing.
186 UnivelSdl PIlilCinle5 of Design
1 The seminal work on storytelling is Aristotle's
Poetics. Additional seminal references include,
The Hero with a Thousand Faces by Joseph
Campbell, Princeton University Press, 1960;
;md How to Tell a Story; and Other Essays
by Mark Twain, Oxford University Press, 1996.
A nice contemporary reference on visual
storytelling is Graphic Storytelling by Will Eisner,
Poorhouse Press, 1996.
Black Granite
Flowing Water
Asymmetric Table
_---- z-.:::::s::::...:::::..-·c;:·::-~ \ I
~--


=== ENTRY: Structural Forms (pp 95-95) ===

There are tilree ways to organize materials to support a
load or to contain and protect something: mass structures,
frame structures, and shell structures.
Structures are assemblages of elements used to support a load or contain and
protect things. In many cases, the structure supports only itself (i.e., the load is
the weight of the materials), and in other cases the structure supports itself and
additional loads (e.g., a crane). Whether creating a museum exhibit, large sculp-
ture, 3-D billboard, or temporary shelter, a basic understanding of structure is
essential to successful design. There are three basic types of structures, mass
structures, frame structures, and shell structures,l
Mass structures consist of materials that are put together to form a solid structure.
Their strength is a function of the weight and hardness of the materials. Examples
of mass structures include dams, adobe walls, and mountains. Mass structures
are robust in that small amounts of the structure can be lost with little effect on the
strength of the structure, but are limited in application to relatively simple designs.
Consider mass structures for barriers, walls, and small shelters- especially in
primitive environments where building skills and materials are limited.
Frame structures consist of struls joined to form a framework. Their strength is a
function of the strength of the elements and jOints, and their organization. Often a
cladding or skin is added to the frame, but this rarely adds strength to the struc-
ture. Examples of frame structures include most modern homes, bicycles, and
skeletons. Frame structures are relatively light, flexible, and easy to construct. The
most common frame configuration is the assembly of struts into triangles, which
are then assembled to form larger structures. Consider frame structures for most
large design applications.
Shell structures consist of a thin material that wraps around to contain a volume.
They maintain their form and support loads without a frame or solid mass inside.
Their strength is a function of their ability to distribute loads throughout the whole
structure. Examples of shell structures include bottles, airplane fuselages, and
domes. Shell structures are effective at resisting static forces that are applied in
specific ways, but are poor at resisting dynamic forces. For example, an egg
effectively resists loads that are applied to its top and bottom, but collapses quickly
when the loads are applied to its sides. Shell structures are lightweight and
economical with regards to material, but are complex to design and vulnerable
to catastrophic failure if the structure has imperfections or is damaged. Consider
shell structures for containers, small cast structures. shelters, and designs
requiring very large and lightweight spans. Large shell structures should generally
be reinforced by additional support elements to stabilize against buckling.'
See also Cost-Benefit, Factor of Safety. Modularity, and Scaling Fallacy.
I An excellent Introduction to the dynamics of
structural forms Is Why Buildings Stand Up:
The Strength of Archlfecture by M,1f/O
Salvadori. W. W. Norton, 1990; and Why
BuikJings Falllhvn; How Structures Fail by
Matlhys Levy and Mario Salvadol'l. W. W.
Norton, 1992.
• Note that shell structures can be reinforced to
better withstand dynamic forces. FOf example.
monolithic dome structures apply concrete
over a rebar-remfoo:ed foam shell structure.
The resulting struclurallorm IS likely Ihe most
disaster-resistant structure available short 01
moving into a mOt.mialn.


=== ENTRY: Symmetry (pp 96-96) ===

A property of visual equivalence among elements in a form.
Symmetry has long been associated with beauty, and is a property found in virtually
all forms in nature. It can be seen in the human body (e.g., two eyes, two ears, two
arms and legs), as well as in animals and plants. Symmetry in natural forms is
largely a function of the influence of gravity, and the kind of averaging of form that
occurs from merging genetic information in reproduction. There are three basic
types of symmetry: reflection, rotation, and translation. 1
Reflection symmetry refers to the mirroring of an equivalent element around a
central axis or mirror line. Reflection symmetry can occur in any orientation as
long as the element is the same on ooth sides of the mirror line. Natural forms that
grow or move across the Earth's surface have evolved to exhibit reflection symme·
try. For example, a butterfly exhibits reflection symmetry in its body and wings.
Rotation symmetry refers to the rotation of equivalent elements around a common
center. Rotation symmetry can occur at any angle or frequency as long as the
elements share a common center. Natural forms that grow or move up or down a
perpendicular to the Earth's surface have evolved to exhibit rotation symmetry.
For example, a sunflower exhibits rotation symmetry in both its stem and petals.
Translation symmetry refers to the location of equivalent elements in different
areas of space. Translation symmetry can occur in any direction and over any dis·
tance as long as the basic orientation of the element is maintained. Natural forms
exhibit translation symmetry through repraduction---crealing similar looking off·
spring. For example, a school of fish exhibits translation symmetry across multiple,
independent organisms.2
Aside from Iheir aesthetic properties, symmetric forms have other qualities that are
potentially benerlCial to designers. For example, symmetric forms tend to be seen as
figure images rather than ground images, which means they receive more attention
and be better recalled than other elements; symmetric forms are simpler than asym·
metric farms, which also gives them an advantage with regards to recognition and
recall; and symmetric faces are perceived as more attractive than asymmetric faces.l
Symmetry is the most basic and enduring aspect of beauty. Use symmetry in
design to convey balance, harmony, and stability. Use simple symmetrical forms
when recognition and recall are important, and more complex combinations of the
different types of symmetries when aesthetics and interestingness are important.
See also Figure-Ground Relationship, Golden Ratio,
Most Average Facial Appearance Effect, and Self-Similarity.
190 Un.ver ... i1! PrinCiples of DeSign
I A seminal work on symmetry In design Is
Elements of Dynamic Symmetry by Jay
Hambidge, DoYer Publishers, 1978.
~ A nice source for various combin<Jlions of
types of symmetries in natural and human-
created forms is Handbook of Regular Patterns
by Peter S. Stevens, MIT Press, 1984.
J See, lor example, -The Status of Minimum
Principle in the TheorelJcal Analysis of Visual
Pefception~ by Gary Hatfteld and William
Epstein. Psychological Bullebn, 1985, YOI. 97,
p. 155--186; and "Facial Resemblance
Enhances Trust- by lisa M. DeBrulne,
Proceedings of The Royal Society: BiologIcal
Sciences, vol. 269(1498), p. 1307·1312.
Mirror Une
@ (9)
Reflection
Comblnahons Of symmetries can
create harmOniOus. interesting. and
memor~ble de:.lgns. For example,
Ihe Notre Dame Cathedral
Rotation
ml':OI rofdtes mullJple. complex
symmeilies III its de!ilgn. resulting in
a structure thaI IS hoth pleaSing and
Intefe5tlllg to the eye.
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn
@ @
Translation
Mirror Line
Reflection
Translation
Angle = IS'
Rotation
Symmetry 191


=== ENTRY: Threat Detection (pp 97-98) ===

An ability to detect threatening stimuli more efficiently
than nontllreatening stimuli.
People are born with automatic visual detection mechanisms for evolutionarily
threatening stimuli, such as snakes. These threatening stimuli are detected more
quickly than nonthreatening stimuli and are thought to have evolutionary origins;
efficiently detecting threats no doubt provided a selective advantage for our
human ancestors. I
For example, when presented with images containing threatening elements, such
as spiders, and nonthreatening elements, such as flowers, people can locate the
threatening elements more quickly than the non-threatening elements. The search
times are not affected by the location of the threatening element or the number
of distracters surrounding the element. Similarly, people can locate an angry face
in a group of happy or sad faces more quickly than a happy or sad face in a group
of angry faces. The ability to detect evolutionarily threatening stimuli is a function
of perceptual processes that automatically scan the visual field below the level
of conscious awareness. Unlike conscious processing, which is relatively slow
and serial, threat detection occurs quickly and in parallel with other visual and
cognitive processes.2
Almost anything possessing the key threat features of snakes, spiders, and angry
faces can trigger the threat detection mechanism, such as the wavy line of a snake,
the thin legs and large circular body of spiders, and the V-shaped eyebrows of an
angry face. It is reasonable that other general predatory features (e.g., forward-look-
ing eyes) will also trigger the threat-detection mechanism given their evolutionary
relevance, but little research of this type has been conducted. In any event, the
sensitivity to certain threat features explains why twigs and garden hoses often
frighten young children, and why peeple have a general fear of insects that superfi-
cialty resemble spiders (e.g., roaches). When peeple have conscious fears or
phobias of the threatening stimuli, the threat detection ability is more sensitive, and
search times for threatening stimuli are further reduced. Once attention is captured,
threatening stimuli are also better at holding attention than nonthreatening stimuli.
Consider threatening stimuli to rapidly attract attention and imply threat or fore-
boding (e.g., designs of markers to keep people away from an area). Abstracted
representations of threat features can trigger threat-detection mechanisms without
the accompanying negative emotional reaction. Therefore, consider such elements
to attract attention in noisy environments, such as a dense retail shelf display.
Achieving a balance between maximum detectability and minimal negative affect is
more art than science, and therefore should be explored with caution and verified
with testing on the target audience.
See also Archetypes, Baby-Face Bias, and Mimicry.
1 The seminal theoretical work on threat
detection in humans is Tile Principles of
PsyciJ%gyby William James, Henry Holt and
Company, 1890. While the evidence suggesls
innate detection mechanisms for snakes,
spiders, and angry faces, it is probable that
similar detectioo mechanisms exist lor other
forms of threatening stlmuh
I See -Emotion Dr1ves Attention; Detecting the
Snake in the Grass- by Arne Ohman, Anders
FJykt, and Francisco Esteve, Journal of
bperimental Psychology.' General. September
2001, vol. 130(3), p. 466-478: and -Finding
the Face in the Crowd: An Anger Superiority
Effecl" by Christine H. Hansen and Ranald
D, Hansen, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1988, vol. 54. p. 917 924.
Angry race5 are mOle quickly
(Ielected anc! maintain attention
more effecllvely tllan neutral or
l"lappy faces.
Amid the many bl1lboards lining
Houston freeways, tile University
of Houston bl11b03r'd pops out and
commands attention. Tile design
of the advertisement is certainly clean
and well composed, but its UIliQue
ability 10 caplure and hold attention
may be due to threat detectioll.
•
In Visually nOIsy enVironments,
tile average search time for
threatening stimuli IS less than
for nonthreatening 511111Ull.
Tllf~dt Detection 193
Th ree-Oi mensiona I
Projection
A tendency to see objects and patterns as lhree-dimen-
sional wilen certain visual cues are present.
People have evolved to see things as three-dimensional whenever possible-even
when the things are clearly not three-dimensional. The following visual cues are
commonly used to encourage the perception of three-dimensional relationships:!
Interposition
When two overlapping objects are presented, the overlapped object is perceived to
be farther away than the overlapping object.
Size
When two similar objects of different size are presented together, the smaller object
is perceived to be farther away than the larger object. The size of familiar objects
can also be used to indicate the size and depth of unfamiliar objects.
Elevation
When two objects are presented at different vertical locations, the object at
the higher elevation is perceived to be farther away.7
Linear Perspective
When two vertical lines converge near their top ends, the converging ends of the
lines are perceived to be farther away than the diverging ends.
Texture Gradient
When the texture of a surface varies in density, the areas of greater density are
perceived to be farther away than areas of lesser density.
Shading
When an object has shading or shadows, the shaded areas are perceived to be
the farthest away from the light source and the light areas are interpreted as being
closest to Ihe light source.
Atmospheric Perspective
When muiliple objects are presented together, the objects that are bluer and blur-
rier are perceived to be farther away than the objects that are less blue and blurry.3
Consider these visual cues in the depiction of three-dimensional elements and
environments. Strongest depth effects are achieved when the visual cues are used
in combination; therefore, use as many of the cues as possible to achieve the
strongest effect, making sure that the cues are appropriate for the context.
See also Figure-Ground Relationship and Top-Down Lighting Bias.
194
U nr\l~ rsa l Pfln c l pl~ .. 1)1 DeSIgn
I Note that only slatic cues (as opposed to
motion cues) are presented here. A nice
review the various depth cues is found in
Scnsahon and PercepllOO by Margaret W.
Mallin and Hugh J. Foley, Allyn & Bacon,
1997, p. 165--193.
, An excepLion to this is when a strong
hOrizontal element IS present. which tends to
be perceived as a honzon Ime. tn this case,
objects that are closer to the honzon line are
perceived <.IS farther away than objeclS that
are distant from the han70n hne.
• The relationship between the degree of
blueness anti blurrine5s 10 distance is a
function of experience-
Le., people who live
in a smoggy city Will have a ditferent sense
01 atrno.<;pheric perspective than people who
live in less-polluted rural areas.
Three DImensIonal ProjectIon


=== ENTRY: Top-Down Lighting Bias (pp 99-99) ===

A tendency to interpret shaded or dark areas of an object
as shadows resulting from a light source above the object.'
Humans are biased to interpret objects as being lit from a single light source from
above. This bias is found across all age ranges and cultures, and likely results from
humans evolving In an environment lit from above by the Sun. Had humans evolved
in a solar system with more than one sun, the bias would be different.
As a result of the top-down lighting bias, dark or shaded areas are commonly
interpreted as being farthest from the light source, and light areas are Interpreted
as being closest to the light source. Thus, objects that are light at the top and dark
at the bottom are interpreted as convex, and objects that are dark at the top and
light al the bottom are interpreted as concave. In each case, the apparent depth
increases as the contrast between light and dark areas increases. When objects
have ambiguous shading cues the brain switches back and forth between concave
and convex interpretation.2
The top-down lighting bias can also influence the perception of the naturalness or
unnaturalness of familiar objects. Objects that are depicted with top-down lighting
look natural, whereas familiar objects that are depicted with bottom-up lighting look
unnatural. Designers commonly exploit this effect in order to create scary or unnat-
ural looking images. Interestingly, there is evidence that objects look most natural
and are preferred when lit from the top-left, rather than from directly above. This
effect is stronger for right-handed people than left-handed people, and is a com-
mon technique of artists and graphic designers. For example, in a survey of over
two hundred paintings taken from the Louvre, the Prado, and the Norton Simon
Museums, more than 75 percent were lit from the top left. Top-left lighting is also
commonly used in the design of icons and controls in computer software interfaces.l
The top-down lighting bias plays a significant role in the interpretation of depth
and naturalness, and can be manipulated in a variety of ways by designers. Use a
single top-left light source when depicting natural-looking or functional objects or
environments. Explore bottom-up light sources when depicting unnatural-looking
or foreboding objects or environments. Use the level of contrast between light and
dark areas to vary the appearance of depth.
See also Figure-Ground Relationship, Iconic Representation, and
Three-Dimensional Projection.
196 UIIlvl·r...:l1 PrllIl.Iples of De-:;ign
I Also known as lop-lighting preference and
lil-fram·above assumpliOn.
1 See "Perception of Shape from Shading."
Nature, 1988, vol. 331. p. 163-166; and
·Perceivlng Shape from Shading,· ScientifIC
AmerICan, vol. 256. p. 76-83. both by
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran.
, "Where Is the Sun?" by Jennifer Sun and
Pietro Perooa, Nature Neurosctenee, 1998,
vol. 1(3), p. 183-184.
I CII 5S.\-\oc2
"-
p
11 _' ....
II"""""'"
II AppIicotionl (Mac: OS 9)
I documenl.psd
SCI .... ' 0 A. a Copy
"'Ipho Cha""ols
@ loy. r.
LJ A""o .. II""
"" Spat Colo ..
Colo,: I
U .. ,"<0.1 Solup' Wo<kl"l1 CM't1C
Iodc!t. 6;05 I'M
~.
I'l\11'M
12/6/02,"~ PM
I N.w !3
,. J'b Ropp,- ""I
... lca:tI Oiok ILl
-lI'-I11fU()(D;1
;). CD-iW om. [E;)
-
R.........t:.I.OiokIf;I
_
Roomo:woI:oIo DioklG.1
R.ornood:oIe Oi.k (H:I
__ ~Oiok(1.1
o (mb. d Col"r prom .. : Adob. RGB P99Bl
I Cane.1 I I
<OJ
Two ICr1clered Images or the same
pmson-onc lit from top left and
oliler from below. The Image lit from
top· left looks 1101 mal. whereas the
Image lit from helow looks scary.
:3 ()'
~ .
Graphical user Interiaces generally use
lop-left lighting to Inlply dimensionality
of Windows and conlrols.
The Circles hi from above appear
convex. whereas tile Circles lit tram
below aptJC<lI COI1Cdve. As the
ligllt source moves from tllese
posllions. the deptl1 cues become
Illcreaslllgtyaml)lguous.


=== ENTRY: Uncertainty Principle (pp 100-100) ===

The act of measuring certain sensitive variables in a
system can alter them, and confound the accuracy of
the measurement.
This principle is based an Heisenberg's uncertainty principle in physics.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle states that both the position and momentum of
an atomic particle cannot be known because the simple act of measuring either
one of them affects the other. Similarly, the general uncertainty principle states
that the acl of measuring sensitive variables in any system can alter them, and
confound the accuracy of the measurement. For example, a common method of
measuring computer performance is event logging: each event that is performed
by the computer is recorded. Event logging increases the visibility of what the
computer is doing and how it is performing, but it also consumes computing
resources, which interferes with the performance being measured.
The uncertainty introduced by a measure is a fUnction of the sensitivity of vari-
ables in a system, and the invasiveness of the measure. Sensitivity refers to the
ease with which a variable in a system is altered by the measure. Invasiveness
refers to the amount of interference introduced by the measure. Generally, the
invasiveness of the measure should be inversely related to the sensitivity of the
variable measured; the more sensitive the variable, the less invasive the measure.
For example, asking people what they think about a set of new product features is
a highly invasive measure that can yield inaccurate results. By contrast, inconspic-
uously observing the way people interact with the features is a minimally invasive
measure, and will yield more reliable results.
In cases where highly invasive measures are used over long periods of time, it is
common for systems to become permanently altered in order to adapt to the dis-
ruption of the measure. For example, the goal of standardized testing is to measure
student knowledge and predict achievement. However, the high stakes associated
with these tests change the system being measured: high stress levels cause
many students to perform poorly; schools focus on teaching the test to give their
students an advantage; students seek training on how to become test wise and
answer questions correctly without really knowing the answers; and so on. The
validity of the testing is thus compromised, and the invasiveness of the measure
fundamentally changes the focus of the system from learning to test-preparation.
Use low-invasive measures whenever possible. Avoid high-invasive measures; they
yield questionable results, reduce system efficiency, and can result in the system
adapting to the measures. Consider using natural system indicators of perform-
ance when possible (e.g., number of widgets produced), rather than measures
that will consume resources and introduce interference (e.g., employee log of
hours worked).
See also Cost-Benefit, Expectation Effects, Feedback Loop, Framing, and
Signal-ta-Noise Ratio.
198 UnIversal Pnnclple!; 01 Design
+
+
+
System Behavior
•
•
•
System Efficiency
Invasiveness of Measure
I
I
I
I
There IS an Inverse relationship
between the Invasiveness and the
accuracy of system measures.
The more IIwaSlve the techniques
to measure a phenomenon, the less
accurale the measurements. In
extreme cases, InvaSive measures
can so severely disrupt a system
thai It will ailci liS goal 10 serve the
measure, mal(ing measurement
meaningless. System efficiency also
suffers from Invasive measurement
techniques, Since system resources
must be applied increasingly to
accommodate the measurement.
,
-------------------
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
lime
Uncertainly Pnnclple 199


=== ENTRY: Uniform Connectedness (pp 101-101) ===

Elements that are connected by uniform visual properties,
such as color, are perceived to be more related than ele-
ments that are not connected.
The principle of uniform connectedness is the most recent addition to the
principles referred to as Gestalt principles of perception. It asserts that elements
connected to one another by uniform visual properties are perceived as a single
group or chunk and are interpreted as being more related than elements that
are not connected. For example, a simple matrix composed of dots is perceived
as columns when common regions or lines connect the dots vertically, and is
perceived as rows when common regions or lines connect the dots horizontallY,l
There are two basic strategies for applying uniform connectedness in a design:
common regions and connecting lines. Common regions are formed when edges
come together and bound a visual area, grouping the elements within the region.
This technique is often used to group elements in software and buttons on
television remote controls. Connecting lines are formed when an explicit line joins
elements, grouping the connected elements. This technique is often used to
connect elements that are not otherwise obviously grouped (e.g., not located
closely together) or to imply a sequence.
Uniform connectedness will generally overpower the other Gestalt principles. In a
design where uniform connectedness is at odds with proximity or similarity, the
elements that are uniformly connected will appear more related than either the
proximal or similar elements. This makes uniform connectedness especially useful
when correcting poorly designed configurations that would otherwise be difficult
to modify. For example, the location of controls on a control panel is generally
not easily modified, but a particular set of controls can be grouped by connecting
them in a common region using paint or overlays. In this case, the uniform
connectedness resulting from the common region will overwhelm and correct the
poor control positions.
Use uniform connectedness to visually connect or group elements in a design.
Employ common regions to group text elements and clusters of control elements,
and connecting lines to group individual elements and imply sequence. Consider
this principle when correcting poorly designed control and display configurations.
See also Chunking, Figure-Ground Relationship, and Good Continuation.
200 UnIVersal Pnnclrlcs of Design
I The seminal work on uniform connectedness
is "Rethinking Perceptual Organization: The
Role of Uniform Connectedness" by Stephen
Palmer and Irvin Rock, 1994. Psychonomfc
Bolletin & Review. vol. 1, p. 29-55.
• • • • •
•• • •
• • • • • •
• • • • •
Print
-- -- --
-- --
--II
• • • • •
• • • • • •
•• • •
• • • • •
Prinler-------------------------,
Name:
Slatus:
Ready
Type:
Xerox DC 440/ 432/ 425/420 PS 3
Where:
66.64.13.240:lp
Commen!:
Print Range
r. All
r Pag
lrom J
10' J
r
~lc-:lion
Common regions are frequently
used in sottware interfaces to group
related conlrals.
Properties ...
r Prinl to file
Copies ---------,
Number of Copies
~
OK
Cancel
The use of common regions and
connecting hnes IS a powerful
means of grouping elements and
overwhelming compellng cues like
proxlr11lty and slll1ilarity.
t COLIMA
o
TRAIL
... CHISOS
BASIN
SOUTH
o
RIM
t COLIMA
0
TRAIL
... CHISOS
BASIN
SOUTH
0
RIM
The proximity between unrelated
words (e.g., Chlsos and South) on
tllis rendenng of a sIgn at Big Bend
Nalional Park lends itself to misinter-
pretation. Group!ng tile related
words 111 a common regIon 'NOuld
be a simple way to correct the sign.
Uniform Connectedness 201
...


=== ENTRY: Visibility (pp 102-103) ===

The usability of a system is improved when its status and
methods of use are clearly visible.
According to the principle of visibility, systems are more usable when they clearly
indicate their status, the possible actions that can be performed, and the conse-
quences of the actions once performed. For example, a red light could be used to
indicate whether or not a device is receiving power; illuminated controls CQuid be
used to indicate controls that are currently available; and distinct auditory and
tactile feedback could be used to acknowledge that actions have been performed
and completed. The principle of visibility is based on the fact that people are
better at recognizing solutions when selecting from a set of options, than recalling
solutions from memory. When it comes to the design of complex systems, the
principle of visibility is perhaps the most important and most violated principle
of design.]
To incorporate visibility into a complex system, one must consider the number of
conditions, number of options per condition and number of outcomes-the com-
binations can be overwhelming. This leads many designers to apply a type of
kitchen-sink viSibility-i.e., they try to make everything visible all of the time. This
approach may seem desirable, but it actually makes the relevant information and
controls more difficult to access due to an overload of information.2
Hierarchical organization and context sensitivity are good solutions for managing
complexity while preserving visibility. Hierarchical organization puts controls and
information into logical categories, and then hides them within a parent control,
such as a software menu. The category names remain visible, but the controls
and information remain concealed until the parent control is activated. Context
sensitivity reveals and conceals controls and information based on different
system contexts. Relevant controls and information for a particular context are
made highly visible, and irrelevant controls (e.g., unavailable functions), are
minimized or hidden.
Visible controls and information serve as reminders for what is and is not possible.
Design systems that clearly indicate the system status, the possible actions that
can be performed, and the consequences of the actions performed. Immediately
acknowledge user actions with clear feedback. Avoid kitchen-sink visibility. Make
the degree of visibility of controls and information correspond to their relevance.
Use hierarchical organization and context sensitivity to minimize complexity and
maximize visibility.
See also Affordance, Mapping, Mental Model, Modularity, Progressive Disclosure,
and Recognition Over Recall.
202 Univcrc;al PrinCiples of Design
, The seminal work on visibility is The Design of
Everyday Things by Donald Norman.
Doubleday, 1990.
1 The enormity of the number of visibility
conditions is why visibility is among the most
violated of the design principles-it is. quite
simply, difficult to accommoctate all of lhe
possibilities of complex systems.
Three Mile Island Unit 2
Harrisburg. Pennsylvania
March 28, 1979, 4,00 A.M.
VisibIlity of complex systems IS essential
for problem solvmg
especially in
limes of stress. An analysis of key
events of tile TMI accident reveals a
number 01 blind spots in the system
that made understanding and solving
the problems exceedingly difficulL
To further complicate matters, alarms
were blaring, lights were flashing, and
critical system feed back was routed
to a printer that could only print
®
Secondary Loop
Primary Loop
15 lines a minute
status information
was more than an hour behind for
much of Ihe crisis.
I
J
I
o
>
/
Control Room
~ PLAtE.
EVENT
00,00,00
(2)
00,00,02
00,00,03
0
00,00,04
@
@0
00,00,09
0
00,00,11 00
00
00,02,00
0
00,0430 00
00
00,08,00
@0
01,20,00
CD0
01,40,00
CD
02,15,00 00
02,20,00 00
0
02A5,00
0730,00 000
09,00,00
®
0
15,00,00
CD
Coolant pumps in the secondary loop malfunction and shut down.
Temperature and pressure in the primary loop increase.
The pressure release valve (PORV) opens automatically to lower the pressure.
Backup pumps automatically turn on.
Operators do not know that the backup pumps are disconnected.
The control rods are lowered to slow the nuclear chain reaction and reduce the temperature.
The PORV light goes out in the control room, indicating that the PORV closed.
Operators cannot see that the PORV is stuck open. Steam and water is released through the PORV.
Emergency water is automatically injected into the primary loop to keep the water at a safe level.
Instruments in the control room indicate that water level in the primary loop is rising. Operators shut down
the emergency water injection.
Operators cannot see that the water level in the primary toop is actually dropping. Steam and water
continue to be released through the PORV.
An operator notices that the backup pumps are not working. He connects the pumps and they begin
operating normally.
Pumps in the primary loop vibrate violently because of steam in the line. Two of four pumps are shut down.
The other two pumps shut down. Temperature and pressure in the primary loop continue to rise.
The water level drops below the core. Radioactive gas is released through the PORV.
An operator notices that the temperature at the PORV is high. He stops the leak by shutting a PORV
backup valve.
Operators still cannot see that the water level in the primary loop is actually dropping.
Radiation alarms sound and a site emergency is declared. The level of radioactivity in the primary loop is
over 300 times the normal level.
Operators pump water into the primary loop, but cannot bring the pressure down. They open the backup valve
to the PORV to lower pressure.
An explosion occurs in the containment structure.
Operators cannot see that an explosion occurred. They attribute the noise and instrument readings to an
electrical malfunction.
The pumps in the primary loop are reactivated. Temperatures decline and the pressure lowers. Disaster is
averted-except, of course, for the leaking radiation.
Visibility 203
von Restorff Effect
A phenomenon of meillory in which noticeably different
things are Illore likely to be recalled than common thingsl
The von Restorff effect is the increased likelihood of remembering unique or dis-
tinctive events or objects versus those that are common. The von Restarff effect is
primarily the result of the increased attention given to the distinctive items in a set,
where a set may be a list of words, a number of objects, a sequence of events,
or the names and faces of people. The von Restorff effect occurs when there is a
difference in context (Le., a stimulus is different from surrounding stimuli) or a
difference in experience (i.e., a stimulus is different from experiences in memory)?
Differences in context occur when something is noticeably different from other
things in the same set or context. For example, in trying to recall a list of characters
such as EZQL4PMBI, people will have heightened recall lor the 4 because it is the
only number in the sequence-compare the relative difficulty of recall of the 4
to the T in a similar list, EZQLTPMBI. The difference between the 4 and the text
characters makes the 4 more memorable than the T. Differences in context of this
type explain why unique brands, distinctive packaging, and unusual advertising
campaigns are used to promote brand recognition and product sales- i.e.,
difference attracts attention and is better remembered.
Differences in experience occur when something is noticeably different from past
experience. For example, people often remember major events in their life, such
as their first day of college or Iheir first day at a new job. Differences in experience
also apply to things like atypical words and faces. Unique words and faces are
better remembered than typical words and faces.3
Take advantage of the von Restorff effect by highlighting key elements in a presen-
tation or deSign te.g., bold text). If everything is highlighted, then nothing Is
highlighted, so apply the technique sparingly. Since recall for the middle items in
a list or sequence is weaker than items at the beginning or end of a list, consider
using the von Restorff effect to boost recall for the middle items. Unusual words,
sentence constructions, and images are better remembered than their more typi-
cal counterparts. and should be considered to improve interestingness and recall.
See also Highlighting, Serial Position Effects, and Threat Detection.
204 Universal Principles of Deslgu
1 Also known as the lsoialion effect and
novelty effect.
1 The semiMI work on the von Restorff effect is
"Analyse von Vorgangen In Spurenfeld. I.
Ober die Wlrkung von Bereichsbildung im
Spu renfeld~ [Analysis of Processes in the
Memory Trace: On the Effect of Region-
Formation on the Memory Trace] by Hedwig
von Restorff, Psychologische Forschung, 1933,
vol. 18, p. 299-..342.
J Unusual words with unusual spellings are
found in abundance in the Harry Potter books
of J. K. Rawling, and are among the frequently
cited reasons for their popularity with children.
-
llf'm~ In Ihe middle of a IIsl or a
sequence are harder to remember
Ulan Itf':ms 131 the beginning or elld
However, the middle Items Call be
madl:! nlore memorable if they arc
dlfferenl from otller items In tile set
The Chlck·fil·A billboards lise a com·
binatlon of dimensionality and humor
to attract attention and increase
memor.blhly. The billboards effccllvely
comrnand attention in visually nOIsy
Word List
milk
eggs
bread
lettuce
butter
flour
ostrich
orangutan
penguin
cheese
sugar
ice cream
oranges
apples
coffee
enVIronments. clearly and fntelltgently
promote Ihe Chlck·fil-A brand, alld are
quickly read and lIndelslood A.,
billboard design goes, It does not get
much better.
Tile unique paint schemes on
certain Southwest Airlines planes
are velY distinct and memorable.
Tile paint schemes differentiate
Southwest Au·lines from their
competItors, promote vacation
destinations and partners, and
reinforce Iheir repulalion as a fUll,
people--centered airline. lhtS IS a
photograph of the ShalTtu One,
a Southwest Airlines Boeing 737.
von ReslQrff [(tect 205


=== ENTRY: Waist-to-Hip Ratio (pp 104-104) ===

A preference for a particular ratio of waist size to hip size
in men and women.
The waist-ta-hip ratio is a primary factor for determining attractiveness for men
and women. It is calculated by dividing the circumference of the waist (narrowest
portion of the midsection) by the circumference of the hips (area of greatest pro-
trusion around the buttocks). Men prefer women with a waist-ta-hip ratio between
.67 and .80. Women prefer men with a waist-ta-hip ratio between 0.85 and 0.95,1
The waist-to-hip ratio is primarily a function of testosterone and estrogen levels,
and their effect on fat distribution in the body. High estrogen levels result in low
waist-ta-hip ratios, and high testosterone levels result in high waist-ta-hip ratios.
Human mate selection preferences likely evolved to favor visible indicators of these
hormone levels (i.e., waist-to-hip ratios), as they are reasonably indicative of health
and reproductive potential.2
For men, attraction is primarily a function of physical appearance. Women who
are underweight or overweight are generally perceived as less attractive, but in all
cases women with waist-to-hip ratios approximating 0.70 are perceived as the most
attractive for their respective weight group. For women, attraction is a function of both
physical appearance and financial status. Financial status is biologically important
because it ensures a woman of security and status for herself and her children.
However, as women become increasingly independent with resources of their own,
the strength of financial status as a factor in attraction diminishes. Similarly, women
of modest resources may be attracted to men of low financial status when their
physical characteristics indicate strong male features like dominance and mas-
culinity (e.g., tall stature), but men with both high waist-to-hip ratios and high
financial status are perceived as the most desirable.
The waist-to-hip ratio has design implications for the depiction of the human
form. When the presentation of attractive women is a key element of a design, use
renderings or images of women with waist-to-hip ratios of approximately 0.70. When
the presentation of attractive men is a key element of a design, use renderings or
images of men with waist-to-hip ratios of approximately 0.90, strong male features,
and visible indicators of wealth or status (e.g., expensive clothing).
See also Attractiveness Bias, Baby-Face Bias, and Golden Ratio.
206 Univl'r<;(!1 Plinciples of DeSign
1 The seminal work on the waist-to-hip ratio is
"Adaptive Significance of Female Physical
Attractiveness: Role of Waist·to·Hip Ratio,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1993, vol. 65, p. 293-307; and "Female
Judgment of Male Attractiveness and
Desirability for Relationships: Role of Waist-to-
Hip Ratio and Financial Status," Journal of
Personality and Socia! P5ychoJogy, 1995, vol.
69, p. 1089-1101, both by Devendra Singh.
1 While preferences for particular features like
body weight or breast size have changed over
time, the preferred waist-to-hip ratios have
remained stable. For example, in analyzing the
mf'ASUrements of Playboy centerfolds since the
1950s and Miss America winners since the
1920s, researchers discovered that the waisl-
to-hip ratios remained between 0.68 and 0.72
despite a downward trend in body weight.
WI1en asked to select the most
attractive figures from renderings of
men and women of varying weights
and body types, people favored
male C and female A, corresponding
to waist-to-hip ratios of 0.90 and
0.70. respectively.
The world famous Adel Rootstein
mannequins have cllanged to match
the ideal look and body type of men
and women for over five decades
(19605 - 20005). The waist-to-hip
ratios of the mannequins, however,
helVe not changed-
they have
remained constant a1 around 0.90
for men, and 0.70 for women.
A
A
R
c
Q
c
o
Waist lo·Hlp Ratio 207


=== ENTRY: Wayfinding (pp 105-105) ===

The process of using spatial and environmental informa-
tion to navigate Lo a destination'
Whether navigating a college campus, the wilds of a forest, or a Web site, the
basic process of wayfindlng involves the same four stages: orientation, route deci-
sion, route monitoring, and destination recognition.2
Orientation refers to determining one's location relative to nearby objects and the
destination. To Improve orientation, divide a space into distinct small parts, using
landmarks and signage to create unique subspaces. Landmarks provide strong
orientation cues, and provide locations with easily remembered identities. Signage
is one of the easiest ways to tell people where they are and where they can go.
Route decision refers to chOOSing a route to get to the destination. To improve route
decision-making, minimize the number of navigational choices, and provide signs
or prompts at decision points. People prefer shorter routes to longer routes (even if
the shorter route is more complex), so indicate the shortest route to a destination.
Simple routes can be followed most effiCiently with the use of clear narrative direc-
tions or signs. Maps provide more robust mental representations of the space, and
are superior to other strategies when the space is very large, complex, or poorly
designed. This is especially true when the person navigating is under stress, where
the wayfinding may need to be adaptive (e.g., in escaping a burning building).'
Route monitoring refers to monitoring the chosen route to confirm that it is leading
to the destination. To improve route monitoring, connect locations with paths that
have clear beginnings, middles, and ends. The paths should enable a person to
gauge his progress easily along their lengths using clear lines of sight to the next
location, or signage indicating relative location. In cases where paths are particularly
lengthy or the traffic in them slow moving, consider augmenting the sight lines with
visual lures, such as pictures, to help pull people through. Breadcrumbs-visual
cues highlighting the path taken- can aid route monitoring, particularly when a
wayfinding mistake has been made, and backtracking is necessary.
Destination recognition refers to recognizing the destination. To improve destination
recognition, enclose destinations such that they form dead-ends, or use barriers
to disrupt the flow of movement through the space. Give destinations clear and
consistent identities.
See also Errors, Mental Model, and Progressive Disclosure.
208 Unlver5al Prrncrplt:!'> 01 O('slgn
I The seminal work on wayfinding Is TIle Image
of the City by Kevin Lynch, MIT Press. 1960.
, "Cognitive Maps and Spatial Behavior" by
Roger M. Da.\lns and DaVId Stea, In Image
and Environment, Aldine Publrshing Company,
1973, p. 8--26.
1 See. lor example, ·Wayfinchng by Newcomers
in a Complex. Building" by Darrell L Butler,
April L AcqUIOO. Alicia A. Hissong. and
Pamela A. Scott, Human Factors, 1993. vol.
35(1). p. 159--173.
~
(J:ntr;ance G;ate )
Prii ... lat 1
The wayfinding design of the
Piltsburgh Zoo and PPG Aquarium is
diVided Into unique subspaces based
on the type of allllnal and enVIronment
Navrgatlonal choices are minlmat
and destinations are clearly marked
by slgnage and dead ends. The VISitor
map furtller aids wayfinding by
featuring Visible and recognizable
landmarks, clear and consistent
labeling of rmportant locations and
subspaces. and flow lines to assist
In route decisron-making.
~
PrrrsBURGH ZIXJ
& PPG AQuARIUM
Map Key
"'-"" .....
o ~~
..... "-5oop
OATH
(!, ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,-
An,,"
Q ",,-
.." f'EPSI& .... d ...
0 ~.-.. 1t
aD "' ... room.
~ T .ropllon.
Wayfmdlng 209


=== ENTRY: Weakest Link (pp 106-107) ===

The deliberate use of a weak element thaI will fail in order
to protect other elements in the system from damage.
It is said that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. This suggests that the
weakest link in a chain is also the least valuable and most expendable link-a
liability to the system that should be reinforced, replaced, or removed, However,
the weakest element in a system can be used to protect other more important
elements, essentially making the weakest link one of the most important elements
in the system. For example, electrical circuits are protected by fuses, which are
designed to fail so that a power surge doesn't damage the circuit. The fuse is
the weakest link in the system. As such, the fuse is also the most valuable link
in the system.
The weakest link in a system can function in one of two ways: it can fail and
passively minimize damage, or it can fail and activate additional systems that
actively minimize damage. An example of a passive design is the use of fuses
in electrical circuits, where the fuse passively minimizes damage to other com-
ponents on the circuit. An example of an active design is the use of automatic
sprinklers in a building. Sprinkler systems are typically activated by components
that fail to moderate heat-a solder link that melts and activates the sprinkler, or
liquid in a glass cell that expands to break the glass when heated-which then
activate the release of the water.
Applying the weakest-link principle involves several steps: identifying a failure
condition; identifying or defining the weakest link in the system for that failure
condition; further weakening the weakest link and strengthening the other links
as necessary to address the failure condition; and ensuring that the weakest link
will only fail under the appropriate, predefined failure conditions. The weakest-
link principle is limited to systems in which a particular failure condition affects
multiple elements in the system. Systems with decentralized and disconnected
elements cannot benefit from the principle since the elements of the system are
not links in any kind of chain.
The weakest link in a system exists by design or by default- either way, it is
always present. Therefore. consider the weakest link principle when designing
systems in which failures affect multiple elements. Use the weakest link to shut
down the system or activate other protective systems. Perform adequate testing
to ensure that only specified failure conditions cause the weakest link to fail.
Further weaken the weakest element and harden other elements as needed to
ensure the proper failure response.
See also Factor of Safety, Mocularity, and Slructural Forms.
210 Uncversal Pnnclples. 01 OC51~n
Crumple zones are one of Ihe
rnost significant automobile safety
Innovations of tile 20'" century.
The fronl and rear sections of a
vehicle are weakened 10 easily
crumple rn a ColliSIon, reducmg
lhe impact enelgy transferred to
-
tile passenger shell The passenger
shell is reinforced to bettel protect
occupants. Tile lotal system is
designed \0 sacrifice less Important
elements for the most Important
element In the system-the people
in tile vehicle.
Weakest lin" 211
Index
0CV20 Rule, 12
Accessibility, 14
Advance organi1er. 16
Aesthetlc-usabihtVeffecl. 18
Affordance, 20
Ali-frarer light. 169
see also Rule of thirds
Alignment 22
Ali-L.Jston light 169
see also Rule of thirds
Anti-lock brakes, 131
see also Mental model
AOl campaign, 37
see also Cognitive t,Bssonance
Apollo 13, 171
see also Salisfic1l1~
Apple computer retail stores, 65
see also Entry point
Appje iPod. 97
see also Golden ratio
APproximation cood'tiOnlng, 100
see Shap!lIg
Archetypes, 24
AtlractNeness bias, 26
Baby-face bias, 28
Barner-free, 14
see Accessibdlty
BeI1 CUIVC, 140
see Normal distrlbutJOO
Best Is the enemy of the good princJpIe, 170
see SatlSrlClng
Big Bend Signs, 161. 20 1
see a/so PrOJClmlty. Uniform connectedness
Black & WillIe, }45, 195
see also Operant conditioning.
Three-dimensional prOJeCtion
Bob Evans restaurants, 47
see also ConsIstency
Body-ism, 72
see Face-Ism ratio
BRS ballIStic parachute. 89
sec also F orglvcrlCSS
Butterlly ballot, 23
see also Alignment
Challenger, 75
see also Factor 01 safety
Chid<-fiI-A billboard, 205
see also von Restorff effoct
212 UnlvNsal PIIII(;rples or DeSign
Chunking,30
CivIl Rlgtlts Mt.'fTlOI1CII, 187
see also Storytelling
Classical condrtionlng. 32
Chiure,34
Cqv1itive dissonance, 36
CognilNe lOad, 148
see also Pertormance load
Cokx,38
Common fate, 40
Comparison, 42
Conditioning by succes.c;ive approxlInat!ons, 100
see Shaping
Confinnalion, 44
Consistency, 46
Constancy, 48
Constraint, 50
Control,52
Control..tfisplay relationship, 12B
Sl..>c Mappmg
Convergence. 54
Cost~benefrt. 56
Cougar billboard. 193
see also Threat detecOOrl
Caxcoolb graphs, 43
see also Comparison
Crumple zone, 21 1
see also Weakest link
CUbe law. 174
see Scaling fallacy
Dazzle r.amoollage, 121
see also law of Pragnanl
Defensible space, 58
Demand charactenstics, 68
see a/so Expectation effect
Depth of processing, 60
Development cycle, 62
Divine proportion, 96
see Golden ratio
Drunk-driving campaign, 33
see a/so Classical c:ondiholling
Dvorak layout. 151
see also Performance versus preference
Eames lCW chair, 97
see also Golden ratIO
EduNeefingcourse. 31, 61
see also Chunking, Depth d processing
Emobcons, 121
see also Law d Pragnanz
Ently point, 64
Erras,66
£SCher, M.C" 177
see a/so Self-similarity
Expectation effect. 68
Exposure effect, 70
Face-ism ratio, 72
Factor of Ignorance, 74
see Filclor of safely
Factor of safety, 74
Feedback loop, 76
Fibonacci sequence, 7B
Figure-ground relationshrp, 80
Fitts' law, 52
Frve hat racks, B4
Frve ways of orgamZlng information, 84
see Frw hat racks
flexibility-usability tradeoff, B6
Forcing function, 44
see Conflfffiiltion
Fl)'gtYeneSS, B8
Form follows function, 90
Framm&, 92
Frequency-validity effect 70
see fxJDsure effect
Fry's readability graph, 163
see also ReadabilIty
Garbage in-garbaga out, 94
Garner Interference, 114
see afsv Interterence effects
Gaussian distribulion, 140
see Normal distrlbulion
Geocell flood wall, 189
see a/so Structural forms
Gestalt Principles
see Closure, Common fate, Flgure·ground
relalJonship. Good continualion,
law of Pragnanl, ProxJmlly, Stmllanty,
Uniform conncctroness
GIGO, 94
see Garbage In--Garbage out
Golden grid rule, 168
see Rule of thirds
Golden mean, 96
see Golden rallO
GoIdet1 number, 96
see Golden ratIO
Golden pro~lOIl, 96
see Golden rallO
Golden ratio, 96
Golden section, 96
Goo::! continuailon, 98
Google, 143
see also Ockham's razor
Gutenberg diagram, 100
Gutenberg rule, 100
sre Gutenberg diagram
Halo effect, 68
see also Expectation ettect
Hawthorne effect, 68
see also ExpectatIOn effect
Hick's law. 102
Hick-Hyman law, 102
see HICk's law
HlE!farchy of needs, 106
Herarchy, 104
Highlighting, 1~
Hummer, 91
see also Form follows funcllon
iconIC representallon, 110
lcosa Shelters, 189
see also Structural forms
Immersion. 112
Instrumental amditiomng, 144
sre Operant condltiorllflg
Interference effects, 114
Inverted pyramid, 116
Isolation effect, 204
see von Restorif effect
Ileration, 118
Juran's principle, 12
see8Qf20 Rule
Kinematic load, 148
see also Perlormance toad
law of ecoruny, 142
law 01 good ronf®jratlOll, 120
see Law ci Pr3gnanz
Law of good figure, 120
see Law 01 Pragnanz
Law 01 parslfnony, 142
see Ockham's razor
Law 01 Pragnanz, 120
Law of precISKlfl, 120
see law of Pragnanl
law of pre&nance, 120
see Law of Pragnanz
law of simplicity, 120
see law of PragMnz
Law of sires, 174
sooScaling Fallacy
layering, 122
le Corbusier, 79
Sl.'C also Fibonacci sequence
legibility, 124
Levels-of-processing approach, 60
sec Dcplh of processing
Ufe cycle, 126
IJncoIn's assassination report. 117
soo also Inverted pyramid
lIt-from-abaoie assumption, 196
see Top-down lighting bias
lcUl-lsm, 26
see AtlfactlYeOeSS bias
MAFA effect. 138
see Most average facial appearance effecl
Mandelbrol. set. 177
see also Self-similanty
Mannequins. 207
see also Waist-to-hip ratIO
Mapping, 128
Mar's face, 121
see also law of Pragnarll
Maslow's hierarchy of needs, 107
sec also Hierarchy of needs
Mental mOOel, 130
Mere exposure effect. 70
st.'c Exposure effect
Mimicry, 132
Mnemonic device, 134
Moc!uJanty, 136
ModulOf, The, 79
see also Fibonacci sequence
Mala Usa, 177
see also Sen-Slmilanty
Most average facial appearance effect. 138
Nautdus shell, 97
see also Gok:Ie:n raOO
Nightingale, Florence, 43
sec also Comparison
Nixon-Kennedy debate, 27
see also Attractiveness bias
Nokia phOflCS, 19
see also Aesthetic-usability effect
Norm<ll distribution, 140
Notre Dame caUledral, 97, 191
see also Golden ratio. symmclry
Novelty effect, 204
see von Restorlr effoct
Nllcip.ar waste markers, 25
see also Archetypes
Occam's razor, 142
see Ockham's raZQf
Ockham's razor, 142
OhIO Dry campatgTl, 93
see also Framing
Ojcx Juar, 159
sec also Prototypmg
Operant condiholllng, 144
Order effect, 179
.see also Seflal positIOn effects
OnentatlOn sensrtJYity, 146
OXO griPS, 21
see also Affordance
Pareto's prInciple, 12
set! 80120 Rule
Parlhenon, 97
Sl.'C alf,(J GOlden ratio
Path-or-Icast-rcsistance prinClP~, 14B
see Perlormance load
Perceplual constancy, 48
see Constancy
Pcrlormance load, 148
Performance versus preference, 150
photomosalC, 177
see also Sell-similarity
PictcwlCIl superlonty effect 152
see Picture superiority effect
PICture SUperKll'lty effect. 152
Pigeon bomb, 181
see al50 Shaping
PIttsburgh Zoo map, 209
see also Wayfinding
Placebo ellect 68
SeE' also ExpectaIJon effect
Pnmary effect, 178
see also Senal position effects
Principle of !east effort, 148
sec Performance load
Principle 01 simplicity, 142
Proactive Inlenerence, 114
see also Interfp,rence eftecls
Prosresslve disclosure, 154
Prospoct-refuge, 156
Prototyplng, 158
Pro1Jmlty, 160
Pygrn..1hon effect. 68
see also Expectahon effect
QWERTY layout, 151
Readability, 162
Recency effect, 178
RecognitIOn (M!f meal!, 164
Redundancy, 1£6
Repetlhon effect 70
see Exposure effect
Repe:bhon-vatichty effect 70
see Exposure effect
Rp.troachve Interference, 114
Rosenthal effect 6B
Rubin vase, 81
see alSo Figure-ground relationship
Rule of thirds, 168
Russian prupaganda, 71
,'>P.e also Exposure effect
Satlsficing, 170
Savanna hypothesis, 172
see Savanna preference
Savanna preferP.fICe, 172
Scabng fallacy, 174
Scclio aurea. 96
see Golden ratio
Scgway Human Transporter, 21, 129
sec also Affordance, Mapplll8
Self -Slmllanty, 176
Senal IJOSIbon effects. 178
Shaping. 180
Signal-Io-noise rallO, 152
Srmilaoty, 184
Smaller and Smaller, 177
see also ScII-51mllanty
SnoWalkers, 119
sec also lIeratlOO
Sony AlBa, 133
see also MimICry
Southwest Airlines Shamu plane, 205
see also von Restorfr effect
Space shunlp.. 75
see a/so Faclur of safety
Standard normal dlSldbullon, 140
sec NOfmal distribution
Statue 01 Uberty, 189
Stimulus-response compalJblllty, 128
sec Mapping
Storytelling, 186
Stradivanus violin, 97
sec also Golden ratIO
Stroop Interference, 114
see also Interlerence effects
SInx:tural forms, 188
Super COw, 167
see alslJ Redundancy
Symmetry, 190
Tabure! Stool, 143
see also Ockham's razor
Tclctubbies, 29, 173
see al50 Baby·Face bias, Savanna preference
Threat detection, 192
Thme Mile l~land, 203
see a/so Vlslbllily
Three-dimensional projection, 194
Tilanic exhibit, J 13
see also ImmersIOn
TiVo, 19
see also Aesthetic-usabIlity effect
Top-dC1o'm fighUng bias, 196
Top-lighting preference, 196
see Top-down Ilghhng bias
Truth ellecl, 70
see Exposure effect
Uncertainty PrincIple, 198
Unrtorm connectedness, 2(X)
Unintended acceleration, 83
sec also Fill's law
UnrYefSal deSIgn, 14
see AccessIbility
Verification principle, 44
see ConfIrmation
Visibility, 202
Vital few and \riVl81 many mle, 12
see 80120 Rufe
Vilruvian Man, 97
see also Golden rallo
von Restorff effect. 204
Waist-to-hip ratio, 206
Wall Street Journal. 65, 101
see also Entry point, Gutenberg diagram
Wayflnding, 208
Weakest link, 210
Yamaha cello, 143
seealsoOckham's razor
Z pattern of processing, 100
soo Gutenberg dl1lgram
Index 2 13
